<a id='98351472-65dd-4ca5-b9c5-a68ea1116ea4'></a>

Check for updates

<a id='90a95adb-6637-49ac-8252-ed90cd950b1f'></a>

Received: 17 March 2020 | Accepted: 31 March 2020

<a id='536e6777-454d-459a-9f5c-777b09dd9258'></a>

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.25827

<a id='48221f2e-1746-40fe-a625-87330d56185e'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY
WILEY

<a id='f2b0fa4a-2051-4931-83d2-fa660f68c7c5'></a>

RESEARCH ARTICLE

<a id='609572e0-2b8e-4dce-8ed1-06c43a14af71'></a>

The effectiveness of quarantine of Wuhan city against the
Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A well-mixed
SEIR model analysis

<a id='a00a69f6-57f3-4e64-af50-7d7575c8864b'></a>

Can Hou¹ | Jiaxin Chen¹ | Yaqing Zhou¹ | Lei Hua¹ | Jinxia Yuan¹ | Shu He¹ |
Yi Guo¹ | Sheng Zhang¹ | Qiaowei Jia¹ | Chenhui Zhao¹ | Jing Zhang¹ |
Guangxu Xu² | Enzhi Jia¹ ID

<a id='fba81950-4f76-419a-85b0-f24ef6cfe53e'></a>

¹Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Jiangsu Province Hospital and Nanjing Medical University First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China

<a id='2a27b4fc-7f12-4a43-a6fb-e78d2eaca366'></a>

2Department of Rehabilitation Medicine,
Jiangsu Province Hospital and Nanjing Medical
University First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, China

<a id='518b3bf0-6bb4-47c7-ba7a-11ea9dd5200d'></a>

Correspondence
Enzhi Jia, Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Jiangsu Province Hospital and
Nanjing Medical University First Affiliated
Hospital, Guangzhou Rd 300, Nanjing,
210029 Jiangsu Province, China.
Email: enzhijia@njmu.edu.cn

<a id='d169879a-0707-4762-97d0-8bc15e764e94'></a>

### Funding information
National Natural Science Foundation of China,
Grant/Award Numbers: 30400173, 30971257,
81170180, 81970302; Priority Academic
Program Development of Jiangsu Higher
Education Institutions

<a id='3a096981-92dd-4a85-9c56-0856fcc172cd'></a>

## Abstract
A novel coronavirus pneumonia, first identified in Wuhan City and referred to as COVID-19 by the World Health Organization, has been quickly spreading to other cities and countries. To control the epidemic, the Chinese government mandated a quarantine of the Wuhan city on January 23, 2020. To explore the effectiveness of the quarantine of the Wuhan city against this epidemic, transmission dynamics of COVID-19 have been estimated. A well-mixed "susceptible exposed infectious re-covered" (SEIR) compartmental model was employed to describe the dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic based on epidemiological characteristics of individuals, clinical progression of COVID-19, and quarantine intervention measures of the authority. Considering infected individuals as contagious during the latency period, the well-mixed SEIR model fitting results based on the assumed contact rate of latent individuals are within 6–18, which represented the possible impact of quarantine and isolation interventions on disease infections, whereas other parameter were suppose as unchanged under the current intervention. The present study shows that, by reducing the contact rate of latent individuals, interventions such as quarantine and isolation can effectively reduce the potential peak number of COVID-19 infections and delay the time of peak infection.

<a id='dba6df13-bfd2-4c88-893d-e3e4f49bfd89'></a>

## KEYWORDS
contact rate, COVID-19, latent individuals, SEIR compartmental model

<a id='d754d303-1a8c-4c3a-9334-92b343d6a702'></a>

# 1 | INTRODUCTION

On 11 February 2020, the COVID-19 virus was identified by the Inter-national Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) as a "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" (SARS-CoV-2), and a report from the ICTV Coronaviridae Study Group determined the virus belongs to the existing species of severe acute respiratory syndrome-related

<a id='857c9c7a-006b-4c8f-a373-3e9eed206b3e'></a>

coronavirus.¹ The novel coronavirus has been named as COVID-19 by the director-general of the World Health Organization (WHO).² The pneumonia outbreak became a worldwide concern when the Wuhan Municipal Health Commission reported 27 cases of viral pneumonia, including seven critically ill cases on 31 December 2019. The WHO reported that a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) was identified as the causative virus by Chinese authorities on 7 January 2020.³

<a id='f89a7aef-28d7-4010-b3f9-aa7b4e384893'></a>

Can Hou and Jiaxin Chen contributed equally to the study.

<a id='872f190b-92d1-4418-b790-8c7ebd7c032b'></a>

J Med Virol. 2020;92:841-848.

<a id='0d4a576d-dae8-4fd5-aa72-0cb89e127439'></a>

wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jmv

<a id='8f640648-baf0-490f-a2b1-393d87773e9e'></a>

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

<a id='1a1b7304-ea99-4d2b-a616-b25000e1500a'></a>

841

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='987fb412-92ab-45be-8a4c-70a56bd47d2a'></a>

842

<a id='2cad2cbe-0024-49e7-b41e-c378773d1a5b'></a>

-WILEY-

<a id='cec2211b-bed2-4da3-b142-cffd67b34cd9'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='9d29f0ae-6c1c-47eb-9ab8-0bdc474a9147'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='d5a3428d-b27a-483e-b804-8d0f83b22572'></a>

As of 14 February 2020, 66 492 accumulative laboratory-confirmed cases and 1523 deaths have been reported in China, and 505 accumulative laboratory-confirmed cases and 2 deaths in 24 countries other than China.⁴ To control the epidemic, the Chinese government mandated a quarantine of Wuhan city on 23 January 2020. The international community has paid close attention to the effectiveness of the quarantine.⁵,⁶ Here, transmission dynamics of COVID-19 were performed, based on currently available epidemiological information to explore the effectiveness of the quarantine of Wuhan city against this epidemic.

<a id='351405c4-759d-4bee-bdb3-a7a6bc38108f'></a>

## 2 | METHODS

### 2.1 | Data collection

The data of confirmed and suspected cases of COVID-19 acute respiratory disease reported by cities and provinces in mainland China were obtained from the following: The Health Commission of Wuhan City, the Health Commission of Hubei Province, the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China, and the World Health Organization situation reports.7-10

<a id='df9afe8d-158e-4496-9f8d-fffb61d892e7'></a>

## 2.2 | The well-mixed SEIR compartmental model
A well-mixed susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) compartmental model was applied to describe the dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic process, based on the epidemiological characteristics of individuals, clinical progression of COVID-19, and quarantine intervention measures of the authority. The model was parameterized by the data obtained from confirmed and suspected cases of COVID-19 reported by regions and provinces in China. This model was used to estimate the dynamics of COVID-19 in Wuhan city.

<a id='2cfd6acd-9b31-4127-b5b2-d854c0ec6839'></a>

COVID-19 has an incubation period and exposed people with no symptoms can carry SARS-CoV-2,¹¹ unlike SARSr-CoV. COVID-19 is contagious during the incubation period¹²; therefore, the SEIR compartmental model was modified in the present study. For the well-mixed SEIRS model, the population under consideration is represented by four groups of individuals: susceptible (S) (vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection), exposed (E) (latent individuals and those capable of spreading SARS-CoV-2), infectious (I) (symptomatic, capable of spreading SARS-CoV-2), and recovered (R) (immune to the SARS-CoV-2). The contact rates, r1 and r2, which represent the probability of susceptible persons coming into contact with an infected individual and latent individuals being infected, respectively. The infectious rates, ẞ1 and ẞ2, control the rate of spread. In this situation, ẞ1 represents the probability of infection per exposure when a susceptible individual (S) has contacted an infected patient (I) and becomes a latent exposed individual (E). While ẞ2 represents the potential rate per exposure when a susceptible individual (S) has mutual contact with an exposed individual (E), and transmits it to

<a id='89f7076c-67a6-4b8e-b7de-c8df370f0ddd'></a>

another exposed individual (E). Since there were controversies about the transmissibility of latent infection, we assumed that half of these asymptomatic latent infections were infectious, similar to influenza.<sup>13</sup> So, we set β2 = 1/2 × β1. The incubation rate, α, is the rate of latent individuals becoming infectious (average duration of incubation is 1/α). The recovery rate, γ = 1/D, is determined by the average duration time (day). The following system of equations summarizes the transmission dynamics model (Figure 1).

<a id='0b4d0ee7-4d5b-4ac9-8399-785c566e630a'></a>

## 2.3 | Parameter estimations for COVID-19

As previously mentioned, the key parameters involved in this model include the initial values of the susceptible population, the exposed population, the symptomatic infected population, and the recovered population. These parameters are described in Table 1.

<a id='762b27fb-d385-4254-9ccf-1ccd2cf72a74'></a>

The parameters included in the model were transition prob-abilities from one state to another on any given day. Referring to the SARS epidemic data, the contact rate of infected individuals after quarantine and isolation is set to 6.18 In addition, the contact rate of latent individuals was measured as follows: the number of cumulative close contacts (739) divided by the number of confirmed cases (41), based on the report from the Health Commission of Wuhan City on 11 January 2020.16 A contact rate ranging from 6 to 18 was applied to analyze the spread of COVID-19 and the effectiveness of quarantine in Wuhan.

<a id='7bc3b42d-ad6f-45f4-abca-45c7460cc790'></a>

The probability of infection of susceptible individuals, which
were infected by symptomatic exposed groups, could be estimated
as the number of newly confirmed cases divided by the number of
closed contacts, based on the report from the National Health
Commission of the People's Republic of China from 21 January 2020,
to 19 February 2020.17 The average number, 4%, was set as the
parameter in the model. The reciprocal value of the incubation period
was set as the transition rate of latent individuals becoming infected

<a id='69bc97b6-6ac0-4562-9902-7fe42563b55c'></a>

dS/d t=-r₁β₁IS/N-r₂β₂ES/N dE/dt=r₁βIS/N-αE+r₂β₂ES/N dI/dt=αE-γΙ dR/dt=γΙ <::start: flowchart::> Susceptible (maroon rectangle) has an arrow labeled "r₁" pointing to Contacted Infected (blue rounded rectangle) and an arrow labeled "r₂" pointing to Contacted Exposed (light blue rounded rectangle). Contacted Infected has an arrow labeled "β₁" pointing to Exposed (teal rectangle). Contacted Exposed has an arrow labeled "β₂" pointing to Exposed. Exposed has an arrow labeled "α" pointing to Infected (orange rectangle). Infected has an arrow labeled "γ" pointing to Recovered (green rectangle). FIGURE 1 Diagram of the well-mixed susceptible-exposed- infectious-recovered (SEI) model adopted in the present study for simulating the COVID-19 :end: flowchart::>

<a id='a7059264-6860-4cd3-b285-c01aad34407a'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='0821c41e-fff7-4390-89c9-9a3f78f2a130'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='dca96eeb-a141-4414-8220-a73ac27a9544'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='1683c14f-03e5-45fe-a2e3-3b73ac1b52b8'></a>

-WILEY-

<a id='daa32ccb-eb46-4928-945f-5ff0e6f1cccd'></a>

843

<a id='030aeb39-dac6-4108-8e50-4a9f406afbf9'></a>

TABLE 1 Parameter estimates for COVID-19 in Wuhan City since
31 December 2019
<table id="2-1">
<tr><td id="2-2">Parameter</td><td id="2-3">Model input</td><td id="2-4">Equation</td><td id="2-5">References</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-6">N</td><td id="2-7">11081000</td><td id="2-8">N = S+E+I+R</td><td id="2-9">7 and 14</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-a">S</td><td id="2-b">11080778</td><td id="2-c">S = N-E-I-R</td><td id="2-d">15</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-e">E</td><td id="2-f">193</td><td id="2-g">E = I/α</td><td id="2-h">15</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-i">I</td><td id="2-j">27</td><td id="2-k">NA</td><td id="2-l">15</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-m">R</td><td id="2-n">2</td><td id="2-o">NA</td><td id="2-p">15</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-q">r1</td><td id="2-r">6</td><td id="2-s">NA</td><td id="2-t">13</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-u">r2</td><td id="2-v">18</td><td id="2-w">739/41 = 18</td><td id="2-x">16</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-y">β1</td><td id="2-z">0.4</td><td id="2-A">Newly confirmed cases/</td><td id="2-B">17</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-C">β2</td><td id="2-D">0.2</td><td id="2-E">cumulative tracking of close contact</td><td id="2-F">17</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-G">α</td><td id="2-H">0.14</td><td id="2-I">1/7 = 0.14</td><td id="2-J">17</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-K">γ</td><td id="2-L">0.048</td><td id="2-M">1/21 = 0.048</td><td id="2-N">17</td></tr>
</table>
Abbreviation: NA, not available.

<a id='2d432e3e-3d24-4bb0-97f2-c50745f6284a'></a>

individuals, and the reciprocal value of the duration of disease was estimated as the probability of recovering from an infection. According to the report, 7 and 21 days were set as the incubation period and duration of disease, respectively. 19

<a id='6967b792-1b56-4536-972c-a62aece068df'></a>

## 2.4 | Simulation

According to the report from the Health Commission of Wuhan City on 31 December 2019, 15 27 cases of COVID-19 were confirmed, 2 patients had recovered, and latent individuals were estimated as 193, based on the 7-day incubation period of COVID-19. The population of Wuhan is about 1108100014; therefore, we set S (0) = 11,081,000 to 27-2 to 193 = 11080 778.

<a id='91568b76-09ef-481f-bc9e-5a50aefe2b33'></a>

2.5 | Statistical analyses
R software (version 3.6.1) was used for well-mixed SEIR compartmental model analysis, with "deSolve" and "ggplot2" packages for calculating predicted parameters and plotting peak values. Curve estimation was analyzed by using Statistics Package for Social Sciences (ver. 16.0; SPSS Incorporated, Chicago, IL). Significance was identified if the null hypothesis could be rejected with more than 95% confidence. All P values are two-tailed.

<a id='96f90408-5fd4-425f-929d-4442c797c21b'></a>

## 3 | RESULTS

### 3.1 | Well-mixed SEIR model fitting

The well-mixed SEIR model fitting results are presented in Figure 2 and Table 2. Noted that the model estimations are based on the

<a id='4bcadb8a-41a7-4547-a674-be2024cf53f8'></a>

assumed contact rate of latent individuals (6-18), which represent the possible impact of quarantine and isolation interventions on disease infections. We assumed the other parameters were constant under the current intervention.

<a id='046e4b40-b6f6-4d0e-b2e2-175b713cdca6'></a>

The trend of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan city was predicted by the estimated parameter values. To explore the possible impact of quarantine and isolation interventions on COVID-19 spread, we plotted the number of exposed individuals, the number of infected individuals, the number of removed individuals, and the number of susceptible individuals and contact rates of latent individuals. As shown in Figure 2 and Table 2, the results suggest that lowering the contact rate of latent individuals consistently reduces the number of infected individuals but may delay the peak in infections.

<a id='870f373f-8dc1-4361-8bd0-e4aa845ecfc2'></a>

## 3.2 | Curve estimation of predicted and actual values of infected individuals

Curve estimation was applied to investigate the relationship between the predicted cases of COVID-19, based on the well-mixed SEIR model, and reported cases of COVID-19, based on the report from the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China. The curve estimation procedure produces curve estimation regression statistics and related plots to 11 different curve estimation regression models. A separate model is produced for each dependent variable. In the analysis model of curve estimation, the number of actual reported cases of COVID-19 from 10 January 2020 to 29 February 2020, was set as the dependent variable. And the number of predicted cases of COVID-19 based on the well-mixed SEIR model, in which the contact rate of latent individuals is set as 18 from 10 January 2020 to 29 February 2020, was set as the independent variable. The R² values of the linear, logarithmic, inverse, quadratic, cubic, power, compound, S-curve, growth, and exponential models were 0.938, 0.603, 0.132, 0.977, 0.981, 0.816, 0.975, 0.402, 0.816, 0.816, and 0.816, respectively (all P<.01) (Table 3 and Figure 3). The most suitable description for the relationship between the predicted and actual values of the infected individuals' curve was the cubic model. Therefore, the cubic model was used to estimate the relationship between the predicted and actual values of infected individuals in the present study.

<a id='777a0eb6-cff7-4752-941d-1d3b8f3fce85'></a>

When the contact rate of latent individuals varied from 6 to 18,
R² was 0.954, 0.945, 0.943, 0.952, 0.970, 0.985, 0.992, 0.992, 0.989,
0.980, 0.932, 0.990, and 0.981 (all _P_ <.01) (Table 4). The curve
estimation of the cubic model results with varying contact rates of
latent individuals is shown in Figure 4. Therefore, predicted cases of
COVID-19 based on the well-mixed SEIR model are in good agree-
ment with the reported cases of COVID-19 based on the report.

<a id='2324d7c4-179f-4e05-9a3f-cdedbddeb8f5'></a>

4 | DISCUSSION

Given the scenarios of different public health intervention efficacy,
we applied the well-mixed SEIR compartmental model to predict the

<a id='fc685679-0c83-4fdd-ac67-509464509ee9'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='8f59661b-61ee-4fed-a1a6-214c56ed8d10'></a>

844

<a id='02448240-7648-490d-ada0-9fa6de4d7da1'></a>

WILEY

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='ffba791b-05bd-4f79-a7c3-9fd35d1d59fc'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='3e5a30cc-4a74-4b1b-a862-610674fb6414'></a>

<::A series of three line charts, labeled (A), (B), and (C), each plotting 'Quantity' against 'Date'. All charts share the same legend for 'Contact Rate', which includes lines for r2=10, r2=11, r2=12, r2=13, r2=14, r2=15, r2=16, r2=17, r2=18, r2=6, r2=7, r2=8, and r2=9, each represented by a different color.

Chart (A): The y-axis ranges from 0e+00 to 9e+06. The x-axis spans dates from 2020-01-01 to 2020-07-01. All lines start at a high quantity (around 9e+06) at the beginning of January 2020 and decrease in an S-curve fashion, reaching near 0e+00 by July 2020. The steepness and exact timing of the decline vary depending on the 'Contact Rate' (r2) value.

Chart (B): The y-axis ranges from 0e+00 to 4e+06. The x-axis spans dates from 2020-01-01 to 2020-07-01. This chart displays bell-shaped curves. Lines with lower r2 values peak earlier and generally higher (e.g., r2=18 peaks around 4e+06 in late January/early February), while lines with higher r2 values peak later and generally lower (e.g., r2=6 peaks around 2.5e+06 in late April/early May).

Chart (C): The y-axis ranges from 0e+00 to 4e+06. The x-axis spans dates from 2020-01-01 to 2020-07-01. Similar to chart (B), this chart also displays bell-shaped curves. The curves vary in peak height and timing, with some peaking earlier and higher (e.g., r2=18 peaks around 4e+06 in mid-February) and others peaking later and lower (e.g., r2=6 peaks around 2.5e+06 in mid-May).
: chart::>

<a id='afc42cb5-fb81-468f-8f71-d22c05dd4388'></a>

<:: (D) A line chart titled "Quantity" versus "Date" shows multiple S-shaped curves representing different "Contact Rate" values. The x-axis is labeled "Date" and ranges from 2020-01-01 to 2020-07-01, with major ticks at each month start. The y-axis is labeled "Quantity" and ranges from 0e+00 to 9e+06, with major ticks at 3e+06, 6e+06, and 9e+06. The legend on the right indicates the "Contact Rate" for each line:
r2=10
r2=11
r2=12
r2=13
r2=14
r2=15
r2=16
r2=17
r2=18
r2=6
r2=7
r2=8
r2=9
: chart::>

<a id='4c1ddeaf-f735-4511-9074-8ec73ced7d8d'></a>

FIGURE 2 The well-mixed susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) model fitting results. A, The well-mixed SEIR model estimated the number of susceptible individuals based on the supposition that the contact rate of latent individuals is 6 to 18. B, The well-mixed SEIR model estimated the number of exposed individuals based on the suppose that the contact rate of latent individuals is 6 to 18. C, The well-mixed SEIR model estimated the number of infected individuals based on the suppose that the contact rate of latent individuals is 6 to 18. D, The well-mixed SEIR model estimated the number of removed individuals based on the suppose that the contact rate of latent individuals is 6 to 18

<a id='8f3aa869-9cdb-49a5-b04b-0047d5a93298'></a>

actual number of infected cases and latent individuals. Using ex-
isting data and incorporating these data with the well-mixed SEIR
compartmental model, our results suggest that reducing the contact
rate of latent individuals after quarantine and isolation can effec-
tively reduce the number of individuals infected with COVID-19
and delay the peak time. Prevention and control of COVID-2019
epidemics require a better understanding of its mode of geo-
graphical dissemination. Different from the coronavirus diseases we
have experienced, such as SARS and Middle East Respiratory Syn-
drome are not contagious during asymptomatic infection, the in-
cubation period of asymptomatic patients with COVID-19 is
extremely contagious to close contacts. 20 Although measures such
as quarantine and isolation were taken early in the outbreak to
reduce the contact rate of infected individuals, it is crucial to reduce

<a id='b6765d60-4edd-41f0-9383-dd4916fa5fff'></a>

the contact rate of latent individuals. By decreasing the contact rate to latent individuals, the number of infections decreases and the peak time is delayed, which is shown in Table 2 and Figure 2. Therefore, movement restriction and community containment measures, such as quarantine and isolation, are essential to control the spread of COVID-19.

<a id='850d1884-f04f-4426-ad7f-8f88e2bc5ea5'></a>

The models were used to fit the actual reported cases in Wuhan City from the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China. The curve estimation program generates curve estimation regression statistics and correlation graphs for 11 different curve estimation regression models. R² of the cubic model is 0.981, which is the highest in 11 different curve esti- mation regression models and this indicated that using the cubic model to estimate the relationship between the predicted

<a id='2c526e6e-5abe-4ac0-8402-91303eaea822'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='08b69d1a-03ce-4971-8ce5-f4a6105ac6c7'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='f6bb0b09-62c8-4b4d-ad07-b1bd48ebdb7a'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='22592f02-08a8-48c5-9e1e-16c29f0b6925'></a>

.WILEY.

<a id='daaeb972-b962-4dbb-9fbc-cbdf0ffeb1b3'></a>

845

<a id='daa1a12b-545a-4f7b-9f74-efcad93dfd63'></a>

TABLE 2 The effects of contact rate of latent individuals'
restrictions at the peak spread of COVID-19 in Wuhan city since
31 December 2019

<table id="4-1">
<tr><td id="4-2">Contact rate of latent individuals</td><td id="4-3">Peak time</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-4">6</td><td id="4-5">3/29/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-6">7</td><td id="4-7">3/24/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-8">8</td><td id="4-9">3/19/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-a">9</td><td id="4-b">3/14/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-c">10</td><td id="4-d">3/11/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-e">11</td><td id="4-f">3/7/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-g">12</td><td id="4-h">3/4/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-i">13</td><td id="4-j">3/1/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-k">14</td><td id="4-l">2/27/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-m">15</td><td id="4-n">2/24/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-o">16</td><td id="4-p">2/22/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-q">17</td><td id="4-r">2/20/2020</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-s">18</td><td id="4-t">2/18/2020</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='16326e1a-2c3b-4091-90dd-ea8615636c3d'></a>

value and the actual value of infected individuals is more accurate than the other curve estimation regression models. As indicated by Table 3 and Figure 3, combined with actual reported cases, the contact rate of latent individuals in the well-mixed SEIR model is set to 18, which can accurately simulate the trend of infected individuals. As mentioned above, the curve estimation of the cubic model results, with different contact rates of latent individuals from 6 to 18, gave R² values of 0.954, 0.945, 0.943, 0.952, 0.970, 0.985, 0.992, 0.992, 0.989, 0.980, 0.932, 0.990, and 0.981 (all P<.01). Thus, the well-mixed SEIR

<a id='a22d59ff-1c01-4cd5-b46f-48541d055b59'></a>

<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" shows observed data points and multiple curve estimation models. The y-axis is labeled "actual_cases" and ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00. The x-axis is labeled "predicted_cases" and ranges from 0.00 to 6000000.00. The legend identifies the different curves:
- O Observed
- --- Linear
- --- Logarithmic
- --- Inverse
- --- Quadratic
- --- Cubic
- --- Compound
- --- Power
- --- S
- --- Growth
- --- Exponential
- --- Logistic
FIGURE 3 The curve estimation model plot based on the contact rate of latent individuals is set as 18
: chart::>

<a id='3d53b474-e532-4dd9-9954-7bd69739e01a'></a>

model-based prediction of COVID-19 cases is consistent with the
reported data.

<a id='49c7e483-e97f-46e2-b35b-b4e7c3b9f919'></a>

Accurately identifying the epidemic trend in advance is critical for infectious disease prevention and control. 21 The well-mixed SEIR model can provide a reference for evaluating the effects of intervention measures. While the basic assumptions are estab-lished, especially in the absence of external intervention, the establishment of a dynamic model based on early epidemic data, or model prediction based on prior parameters, can clearly predict the development of the epidemic without intervention. The tra-ditional public health measures of quarantine and isolation are the most effective measures to control the novel coronavirus out-break, for which we currently have no specific therapeutics or vaccines. However, quarantining and isolating infected individuals

<a id='3f8240af-d386-429b-b249-f5eadb0a685f'></a>

TABLE 3 The curve estimation model summary and parameter estimates based on the contact rate of latent individuals is set as 18
<table id="4-u">
<tr><td id="4-v"></td><td id="4-w" colspan="5">Model summary</td><td id="4-x" colspan="4">Parameter estimates</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-y">Equation</td><td id="4-z">R²</td><td id="4-A">F</td><td id="4-B">df1</td><td id="4-C">df2</td><td id="4-D">Significance</td><td id="4-E">Constant</td><td id="4-F">b1</td><td id="4-G">b2</td><td id="4-H">b3</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-I">Linear</td><td id="4-J">0.938</td><td id="4-K">743.067</td><td id="4-L">1</td><td id="4-M">49</td><td id="4-N">.000</td><td id="4-O">-1.499E3</td><td id="4-P">0.006</td><td id="4-Q"></td><td id="4-R"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-S">Logarithmic</td><td id="4-T">0.603</td><td id="4-U">74.341</td><td id="4-V">1</td><td id="4-W">49</td><td id="4-X">.000</td><td id="4-Y">-4.414E4</td><td id="4-Z">4.452E3</td><td id="4-10"></td><td id="4-11"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-12">Inverse</td><td id="4-13">0.132</td><td id="4-14">7.480</td><td id="4-15">1</td><td id="4-16">49</td><td id="4-17">.009</td><td id="4-18">1.675E4</td><td id="4-19">-4.273E7</td><td id="4-1a"></td><td id="4-1b"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-1c">Quadratic</td><td id="4-1d">0.977</td><td id="4-1e">1.035E3</td><td id="4-1f">2</td><td id="4-1g">48</td><td id="4-1h">.000</td><td id="4-1i">673.025</td><td id="4-1j">0.000</td><td id="4-1k">1.244E-9</td><td id="4-1l"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-1m">Cubic</td><td id="4-1n">0.981</td><td id="4-1o">799.295</td><td id="4-1p">3</td><td id="4-1q">47</td><td id="4-1r">.000</td><td id="4-1s">89.162</td><td id="4-1t">0.004</td><td id="4-1u">-8.65E-10</td><td id="4-1v">2.56E-16</td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-1w">Compound</td><td id="4-1x">0.816</td><td id="4-1y">217.856</td><td id="4-1z">1</td><td id="4-1A">49</td><td id="4-1B">.000</td><td id="4-1C">228.570</td><td id="4-1D">1.000</td><td id="4-1E"></td><td id="4-1F"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-1G">Power</td><td id="4-1H">0.975</td><td id="4-1I">1.876E3</td><td id="4-1J">1</td><td id="4-1K">49</td><td id="4-1L">.000</td><td id="4-1M">0.010</td><td id="4-1N">0.955</td><td id="4-1O"></td><td id="4-1P"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-1Q">S</td><td id="4-1R">0.402</td><td id="4-1S">32.884</td><td id="4-1T">1</td><td id="4-1U">49</td><td id="4-1V">.000</td><td id="4-1W">8.592</td><td id="4-1X">-1.256E4</td><td id="4-1Y"></td><td id="4-1Z"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-20">Growth</td><td id="4-21">0.816</td><td id="4-22">217.856</td><td id="4-23">1</td><td id="4-24">49</td><td id="4-25">.000</td><td id="4-26">5.432</td><td id="4-27">1.008E-6</td><td id="4-28"></td><td id="4-29"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-2a">Exponential</td><td id="4-2b">0.816</td><td id="4-2c">217.856</td><td id="4-2d">1</td><td id="4-2e">49</td><td id="4-2f">.000</td><td id="4-2g">228.570</td><td id="4-2h">1.008E-6</td><td id="4-2i"></td><td id="4-2j"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="4-2k">Logisticª</td><td id="4-2l">0.816</td><td id="4-2m">217.856</td><td id="4-2n">1</td><td id="4-2o">49</td><td id="4-2p">.000</td><td id="4-2q">0.004</td><td id="4-2r">1.000</td><td id="4-2s"></td><td id="4-2t"></td></tr>
</table>
Note: Dependent variable: actual reported cases of COVID-19; independent variable: the predicted cases of COVID-19.

<a id='8471ae1d-c093-4e25-b624-ad672818feba'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='a1061bcd-5abb-420d-bfbf-1bb3fef805bc'></a>

846

<a id='ef284a25-d436-4f1d-b630-fb5eeea94f2a'></a>

-WILEY-

<a id='f7a5d0ac-8142-4e22-8147-2c115630fd16'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='5fef5cfe-5e2a-470d-b9ae-40ffa8777162'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='e9657df3-0f23-4575-afb6-1e81b2c68121'></a>

and latent individuals at the beginning of the outbreak period
would have been a strategic preventative measure.
However, there are several limitations to this study that must be
discussed, namely, too many parameters and nonconstant para-
meters. Before the mandated quarantine of Wuhan city on
23 January 2020, the population of Wuhan fluctuated; thus, the
exact population of Wuhan cannot be determined. In addition, the
parameters of the population contact rate were not from an accurate

<a id='7256ee7e-4f17-4d63-a9a1-a37d8823507a'></a>

data set. Due to quarantine and isolation measures, the contact rate
is constantly changing. Furthermore, we did not consider the rate of
change in personal activity, such as wearing masks, increasing social
distance, and ceasing travel to Wuhan. Thus, the estimates of virus
imports may not be totally accurate. Finally, our models are based on
human-to-human transmission. The possibility of outbreaks caused
by fomites or contamination of the water system by infected feces
was not taken into account. Therefore, if reported data on population

<a id='21bf2885-7813-4056-a52a-ab60bc3586d5'></a>

(A) <::Scatter plot titled "actual_cases" on the Y-axis and "predicted_cases" on the X-axis. The Y-axis ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00, with major ticks at 10000.00, 20000.00, 30000.00, and 40000.00. The X-axis ranges from 0.00 to 5000000.00, with major ticks at 1000000.00, 2000000.00, 3000000.00, 4000000.00, and 5000000.00. The plot shows observed data points as circles and a cubic regression line. A legend indicates "O Observed" and "---Cubic".: chart::>(C) <::Scatter plot titled "actual_cases" on the Y-axis and "predicted_cases" on the X-axis. The Y-axis ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00, with major ticks at 10000.00, 20000.00, 30000.00, and 40000.00. The X-axis ranges from 0.00 to 5000000.00, with major ticks at 1000000.00, 2000000.00, 3000000.00, 4000000.00, and 5000000.00. The plot shows observed data points as circles and a cubic regression line. A legend indicates "O Observed" and "---Cubic".: chart::>(E) <::Scatter plot titled "actual_cases" on the Y-axis and "predicted_cases" on the X-axis. The Y-axis ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00, with major ticks at 10000.00, 20000.00, 30000.00, and 40000.00. The X-axis ranges from 0.00 to 5000000.00, with major ticks at 1000000.00, 2000000.00, 3000000.00, 4000000.00, and 5000000.00. The plot shows observed data points as circles and a cubic regression line. A legend indicates "O Observed" and "---Cubic".: chart::>(G) <::Scatter plot titled "actual_cases" on the Y-axis and "predicted_cases" on the X-axis. The Y-axis ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00, with major ticks at 10000.00, 20000.00, 30000.00, and 40000.00. The X-axis ranges from 0.00 to 6000000.00, with major ticks at 1000000.00, 2000000.00, 3000000.00, 4000000.00, 5000000.00, and 6000000.00. The plot shows observed data points as circles and a cubic regression line. A legend indicates "O Observed" and "---Cubic".: chart::>

<a id='dba9b507-352a-4991-8a95-b7b90e1d55c1'></a>

(B)
<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" showing observed data points (circles) and a cubic regression line (solid line). The Y-axis is labeled "actual_cases" with values from 0.00 to 40000.00. The X-axis is labeled "predicted_cases" with values from 0.00 to 5000000.00. The cubic line rises sharply, peaks around 35000 at predicted_cases around 500000, then drops to around 25000 at predicted_cases around 1200000, and then rises sharply again.: chart::>
(D)
<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" showing observed data points (circles) and a cubic regression line (solid line). The Y-axis is labeled "actual_cases" with values from 0.00 to 40000.00. The X-axis is labeled "predicted_cases" with values from 0.00 to 5000000.00. The cubic line rises sharply, peaks around 38000 at predicted_cases around 600000, then drops to around 25000 at predicted_cases around 2000000, and then rises sharply again.: chart::>
(F)
<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" showing observed data points (circles) and a cubic regression line (solid line). The Y-axis is labeled "actual_cases" with values from 0.00 to 40000.00. The X-axis is labeled "predicted_cases" with values from 0.00 to 6000000.00. The cubic line rises sharply, peaks around 40000 at predicted_cases around 1000000, then drops to around 28000 at predicted_cases around 3000000, and then rises sharply again.: chart::>
(H)
<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" showing observed data points (circles) and a cubic regression line (solid line). The Y-axis is labeled "actual_cases" with values from 0.00 to 40000.00. The X-axis is labeled "predicted_cases" with values from 0.00 to 6000000.00. The cubic line rises sharply, peaks around 38000 at predicted_cases around 3000000, then drops as predicted_cases increase.: chart::> 

<a id='c19d6ce8-a198-4b38-acfb-95bf02413f50'></a>

FIGURE 4 The curve estimation of the cubic model plot with varying contact rates of latent individuals: (A) 6, (B) 7, (C) 8, (D) 9,
(E) 10, (F) 11, (G) 12, (H) 13, (I) 14, (J) 15, (K) 16, (L) 17, and (M) 18

<a id='5843dcdc-7dcf-4a01-823d-6d65ae36f84a'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='56567662-265f-43f8-a9ba-3ee9cfd704f1'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='8d8dc03f-b328-42cc-b14d-cc4d218a6744'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='5d9a76ca-849c-45a4-865e-7cdafa523b73'></a>

.WILEY.

<a id='df15b443-d0aa-44ab-9474-1771a53b08eb'></a>

847

<a id='9560b986-5913-41e5-aef5-ee303e8138dc'></a>

TABLE 4 The cure estimation of cubic model results with varying contact rate of latent individuals
<table id="6-1">
<tr><td id="6-2">Contact rate of latent individuals</td><td id="6-3">R2</td><td id="6-4">P value</td><td id="6-5">Constant</td><td id="6-6">b1</td><td id="6-7">b2</td><td id="6-8">b3</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-9">6</td><td id="6-a">0.954</td><td id="6-b">.000</td><td id="6-c">206.139</td><td id="6-d">0.473</td><td id="6-e">-1.600E-6</td><td id="6-f">1.49E-12</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-g">7</td><td id="6-h">0.945</td><td id="6-i">.000</td><td id="6-j">831.711</td><td id="6-k">0.276</td><td id="6-l">-5.462E-7</td><td id="6-m">2.96E-13</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-n">8</td><td id="6-o">0.943</td><td id="6-p">.000</td><td id="6-q">1.181E3</td><td id="6-r">0.166</td><td id="6-s">-1.983E-7</td><td id="6-t">6.50E-14</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-u">9</td><td id="6-v">0.952</td><td id="6-w">.000</td><td id="6-x">1.186E3</td><td id="6-y">0.106</td><td id="6-z">-3.871E-8</td><td id="6-A">5.81E-15</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-B">10</td><td id="6-C">0.970</td><td id="6-D">.000</td><td id="6-E">877.386</td><td id="6-F">0.072</td><td id="6-G">.000</td><td id="6-H">1.793E-9</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-I">11</td><td id="6-J">0.985</td><td id="6-K">.000</td><td id="6-L">434.200</td><td id="6-M">0.052</td><td id="6-N">-2.046E-8</td><td id="6-O">2.32E-15</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-P">12</td><td id="6-Q">0.992</td><td id="6-R">.000</td><td id="6-S">124.662</td><td id="6-T">0.036</td><td id="6-U">-1.048E-8</td><td id="6-V">8.71E-16</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-W">13</td><td id="6-X">0.992</td><td id="6-Y">.000</td><td id="6-Z">140.919</td><td id="6-10">0.023</td><td id="6-11">-3.584E-9</td><td id="6-12">4.72E-17</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-13">14</td><td id="6-14">0.989</td><td id="6-15">.000</td><td id="6-16">408.813</td><td id="6-17">0.012</td><td id="6-18">1.144E-9</td><td id="6-19">-4.30E-16</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-1a">15</td><td id="6-1b">0.980</td><td id="6-1c">.000</td><td id="6-1d">568.785</td><td id="6-1e">0.005</td><td id="6-1f">2.766E-9</td><td id="6-1g">-4.91E-16</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-1h">16</td><td id="6-1i">0.932</td><td id="6-1j">.000</td><td id="6-1k">9.289E3</td><td id="6-1l">-2.712E3</td><td id="6-1m">157.900</td><td id="6-1n">-1.888</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-1o">17</td><td id="6-1p">0.990</td><td id="6-1q">.000</td><td id="6-1r">117.991</td><td id="6-1s">0.005</td><td id="6-1t">-6.92E-10</td><td id="6-1u">1.85E-16</td></tr>
<tr><td id="6-1v">18</td><td id="6-1w">0.981</td><td id="6-1x">.000</td><td id="6-1y">89.162</td><td id="6-1z">0.004</td><td id="6-1A">-8.65E-10</td><td id="6-1B">2.56E-16</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='20162200-3489-4c8a-8d96-c14fcdd23e9b'></a>

mobility, epidemiological characteristics, and viral transmission mechanisms were considered by the models, the accuracy and validity of the estimates would improve.

<a id='b33fcaf7-4780-4d48-8f61-a4189fc79d93'></a>

In conclusion, we developed a well-mixed SEIR compartmental
model to describe the dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic process.
The fitting results of the well-mixed SEIR model assumed that the

<a id='62c816de-085a-4a62-808e-a0d13de351b9'></a>

contact rate of latent individuals is between 6 and 18, representing the possible impact of isolation and quarantine measures on the disease infection rate. The results suggest that interventions, by reducing the contact rate, such as isolation and quarantine, can effectively reduce the peak number of COVID-19 infections and delay the peak time of infections.

<a id='f25d61b9-3000-41bc-9c6b-77c5020a43ba'></a>

<::Figure (I): A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" with a cubic fit. The Y-axis, labeled "actual_cases", ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00. The X-axis, labeled "predicted_cases", ranges from 0.00 to 6000000.00. Data points are represented by circles, labeled "Observed" in the legend. A solid line represents the "Cubic" fit. The observed data points generally follow the cubic curve, which rises to a peak around 38000.00 on the Y-axis and then declines.: chart::>

<a id='93c00b9d-a1f8-4bf2-b8e1-2349f866cb44'></a>

(J)
<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" with "actual_cases" on the y-axis and "predicted_cases" on the x-axis. The y-axis ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00, with major ticks at 10000.00 intervals. The x-axis ranges from 0.00 to 6000000.00, with major ticks at 1000000.00 intervals. The plot shows data points marked as circles, labeled "Observed" in the legend, and a fitted curve labeled "Cubic". The curve generally increases, then peaks around x=5000000.00 and y=37500.00, and then decreases. The observed points largely follow this cubic trend, with some deviation at higher x-values where the points dip slightly below the curve.::>

<a id='e484e7e9-3820-4ae1-8377-8bb7a0e2fc61'></a>

<::scatter plot
: Title: actual_cases
: X-axis: predicted_cases, ranging from 0.00 to 6000000.00
: Y-axis: Values ranging from 0.00 to 40000.00
: Legend:
:   - Observed (represented by circular markers)
:   - Cubic (represented by a solid line)
: The plot shows observed data points scattered against predicted cases, with a cubic regression line fitted through the data.
: The data points generally increase along both axes, then curve downwards for higher predicted_cases values.
: (K)
::>

<a id='ac381827-3fec-4c38-b4dd-b8af293a7262'></a>

(L)<::A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" shows "actual_cases" on the y-axis ranging from 0 to 40000, and "predicted_cases" on the x-axis ranging from 0 to 6000000. The plot contains data points represented by circles, labeled as "Observed" in the legend. A cubic curve, labeled as "Cubic" in the legend, is fitted through these data points, showing an increasing trend.: chart::>FIGURE 4 (Continued)

<a id='9efd05f6-5572-4725-917a-c1f3aa0056a3'></a>

<::Figure (M): A scatter plot titled "actual_cases" on the y-axis and "predicted_cases" on the x-axis. The y-axis ranges from 0.00 to 40000.00, with major ticks at 10000.00 intervals. The x-axis ranges from 0.00 to 6000000.00, with major ticks at 1000000.00 intervals. The plot shows observed data points (represented by circles) and a fitted cubic regression line (represented by a solid curve). The legend indicates "O Observed" and "--- Cubic".
: chart::>

<a id='5bce4a15-ec64-4a44-9289-19b2431b3cbe'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='3373370e-275f-4bfc-9866-ea72960bc255'></a>

848

<a id='1f18ee18-49f0-4b25-a3a7-76aba92dff54'></a>

-WILEY-

<a id='14ef1938-c80e-4188-b9e5-d7420d3ece05'></a>

JOURNAL OF
MEDICAL VIROLOGY

<a id='9a015171-09f8-4cf7-947f-cb053e77add8'></a>

HOU ET AL.

<a id='a74ed00a-e2ef-4356-92b6-175530c0f0f2'></a>

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge colleagues for helpful comments. This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 81170180, 30400173, 30971257, and 81970302).
A project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.

<a id='2da1ecb6-0dba-441f-a105-794c8ce7676e'></a>

## CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors declare that there are no conflict of interests.

<a id='148a964b-b312-4ff1-873e-61fa7d0f8548'></a>

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
As the guarantor, EJ conceived the study. CH and JC initially drafted the manuscript. YZ, LH, JY, SH, YG enrolled participants and collected data under the supervision of QJ and SZ. CZ, JZ and GX coordinated the study.

<a id='7e9aa3db-6f58-4612-beeb-14ca068d57e5'></a>

ORCID
Enzhi Jia http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1354-9855

<a id='82580464-5c77-44f8-a443-ce45de164faa'></a>

## REFERENCES
1. International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses. https://talk.ictvonline.org/. Accessed 10 February 2020.
2. World experts and funders set priorities for COVID-19 research. https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/12-02-2020-world-experts-and-funders-set-priorities-for-covid-19-research. Accessed 16 February 2020.
3. Coronavirus. https://www.who.int/health-topics/coronavirus. Accessed 15 February 2020.
4. Pneumonia of unknown cause—China. https://www.who.int/csr/don/05-january-2020-pneumonia-of-unkown-cause-china/en. Accessed 05 January 2020.
5. China's citywide quarantines: Are they ethical and effective? https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/chinas-citywide-quarantines-are-they-ethical-and-effective1/. Accessed 10 February 2020.
6. Scientists are racing to model the next moves of a coronavirus that's still hard to predict. https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/02/scientists-are-racing-model-next-moves-coronavirus-thats-still-hard-predict. Accessed 7 February 2020.
7. Health Commission of Hubei Province. http://wjw.hubei.gov.cn/bmdt/ztzl/fkxxgzbdgrfyyq/. Accessed 16 February 2020.
8. National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China. http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/xxgzbd/gzbd_index.shtml. Accessed 16 February 2020.

<a id='a050e38d-a160-4d96-96b8-62f0145487fb'></a>

9. Novel Coronavirus—China, disease outbreak news: Update. https://www.who.int/csr/don/12-january-2020-novel-coronavirus-china/en/. Accessed 16 February 2020.
10. Situation report. https://www.who.int/docs/default&hyphen-qj13;-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200123sitrep-3-2019-ncov.pdf. Accessed 16 February 2020.
11. Hoehl S, Rabenau H, Berger A, et al. Evidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection in returning travelers from Wuhan, China. N Engl J Med. 2020; 382(13):1278-1280.
12. Information office to hold press conference on joint preventing and controlling the epidemic of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infected pneumonia. http://www.scio.gov.cn/xwfbh/xwbfbh/wqfbh/42311/42478/index.htm. Accessed 20 February 2020.
13. Gong J, Sun ZL, Li XW. Simulation and analysis of control of severe acute respiratory syndrome. J Remote Sens. 2003;7(4): 260-265.
14. Health Commission of Hubei Province. http://wjw.hubei.gov.cn/bmdt/ztzl/fkxxgzbdgrfyyq/. Accessed 23 February 2020.
15. Wuhan Health Commission bulletin on the current situation of pneumonia in our city. http://wjw.wuhan.gov.cn/front/web/showDetail/2019123108989?bsh_bid=5481273379&from=groupmessage. Accessed 31 December 2020.
16. Wuhan municipal health commission bulletin on viral pneumonia of unknown cause. http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb/202001/1beb46f061704372b7ca41ef3e682229.shtml. Accessed 11 January 2020.
17. Outbreak communications. http://www.nhc.gov.cn/xcs/yqtb/list_gzbd_2.shtml. Accessed 15 February 2020.
18. Longini IM Jr., Nizam A, Xu S, et al. Containing pandemic influenza at the source. Science. 2005;309(5737):1083-1087.
19. Jin YH, Cai L, Cheng Z, et al. A rapid advice guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infected pneumonia (standard version). Mil Med Res. 2020;7(1):4.
20. Chen TM, Rui J, Wang Q, Zy Z, Ja C, Yin L. A mathematical model for simulating the phase-based transmissibility of a novel coronavirus. Infect Dis Poverty. 2020;9(1):24.
21. Liu W, Bao C, Zhou Y, et al. Forecasting incidence of hand, foot and mouth disease using BP neural networks in Jiangsu province, China. BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19(1):828.

<a id='a519476c-726c-4c4a-a78c-ac6bf23afff9'></a>

**How to cite this article:** Hou C, Chen J, Zhou Y, et al.The effectiveness of quarantine of Wuhan city against the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A well-mixed SEIR model analysis. J Med Virol. 2020;92:841-848.https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.25827

<a id='857c109b-46f2-45a8-952e-c70001648dce'></a>

10969071, 2020, 7, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jmv.25827 by Universita Di Trento, Wiley Online Library on [18/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License