<a id='e8228ebc-a4d5-47a5-8d5c-c15c9586f792'></a>

<::logo: Elsevier
ELSEVIER
The logo depicts a detailed black and white illustration of a tree with figures and a snake, positioned above the company name.::>

<a id='aef4f2e5-0529-4c77-b752-8f590344d318'></a>

<::logo: ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
It features a collection of grey dots arranged in a wing-like pattern above the company name.::>

<a id='7fe22190-7d62-42f7-b0b0-e44b01734256'></a>

Life Sciences

<a id='8a5415d1-5d99-475f-b074-d64e0c8a2d1a'></a>

Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='e0908a8f-c484-41d7-9caa-96327af9e9d2'></a>

www.elsevier.com/locate/lifescie

<a id='30875057-c89f-4ec3-9ca1-1255bfca714a'></a>

Riluzole-induced block of voltage-gated Na$^{+}$ current and activation of BK$_{Ca}$
channels in cultured differentiated human skeletal muscle cells

<a id='2f2551b0-5905-4def-9da5-42e11dba12f6'></a>

Ya-Jean Wang a,1, Ming-Wei Lin a,1, An-An Lin b, Sheng-Nan Wu a,b,*

<a id='4bfd967e-571f-481e-ba1d-632eabbf87aa'></a>

a Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University Medical College, Tainan, Taiwan
b Department of Physiology, National Cheng Kung University Medical College, Tainan, Taiwan

Received 3 April 2007; accepted 6 October 2007

<a id='d98b6a1e-bb11-4df5-ba20-21bd491c6a5b'></a>

# Abstract
Riluzole is known to be of therapeutic use in the management of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. In this study, we investigated the effects of riluzole on ion currents in cultured differentiated human skeletal muscle cells (dHSkMCs). Western blotting revealed the protein expression of \u03b1-subunits for both large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (BK_Ca) channel and Na+ channel (Na_v1.5) in these cells. Riluzole could reduce the frequency of spontaneous beating in dHSkMCs. In whole-cell configuration, riluzole suppressed voltage-gated Na+ current (I_Na) in a concentration-dependent manner with an IC_50 value of 2.3 \u00b5M. Riluzole (10 \u00b5M) also effectively increased Ca2+-activated K+ current (I_K(Ca)) which could be reversed by iberiotoxin (200 nM) and paxilline (1 \u00b5M), but not by apamin (200 nM). In inside-out patches, when applied to the inside of the cell membrane, riluzole (10 \u00b5M) increased BK_Ca-channel activity with a decrease in mean closed time. Simulation studies also unraveled that both decreased conductance of I_Na and increased conductance of I_K(Ca) utilized to mimic riluzole actions in skeletal muscle cells could combine to decrease the amplitude of action potentials and increase the repolarization of action potentials. Taken together, inhibition of I_Na and stimulation of BK_Ca-channel activity caused by this drug are partly, if not entirely, responsible for its muscle relaxant actions in clinical setting.
\u00a9 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

<a id='82247212-f852-4279-9467-04051afeb21c'></a>

Keywords: Riluzole; Voltage-gated Na⁺ current; Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ current; Large-conductance Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ channel; Human skeletal muscle cell

<a id='0da6a7a3-b965-4d40-a2f1-a4f01e8a3efc'></a>

## Introduction
Riluzole (2-amino-6-trifuromethoxybenzothiazole) is an anti-glutamate agent which was thought to affect the course of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Bensimon et al., 1994; Miller et al., 2003; Cheung et al., 2006). Previous studies demonstrated that this drug possesses anticonvulsant and neuroprotective properties (Couratier et al., 1994; Peluffo et al., 1997; Wahl et al., 1997; Gurney et al., 1998; De Sarro et al., 2000). It was demonstrated to reduce glutamate excitotoxicity by inhibiting glutamate release and/or modifying the postsynaptic glutamate receptor cascade (Martin et al., 1993; Mantz et al., 1994; Rothstein and Kuncl, 1995; De Sarro et al., 2000). In addition, emerging evidence has unraveled that riluzole can inhibit

<a id='ee3ea4e9-5484-4ba2-a53c-4d5e3ac3b896'></a>

* Corresponding author. Department of Physiology, National Cheng Kung
University Medical College, No. 1, University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.
Tel.: +886 6 2353535 5334; fax: +886 6 2362780.
E-mail address: snwu@mail.ncku.edu.tw (S.-N. Wu).

1 YJ Wang and MW Lin are equal contributors for this manuscript.

<a id='5b1fa73a-18f1-4f8b-9418-dc1c1591551d'></a>

0024-3205/$ - see front matter  2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.lfs.2007.10.015

<a id='6abb7b4e-1096-4d35-9140-8ac0d15829c2'></a>

voltage-gated Na+ channels (Hebert et al., 1994; Siniscalchi et al., 1997; Song et al., 1997; Yokoo et al., 1998; Zona et al., 1998; Mohammadi et al., 2002). This effect has been proposed to be mainly responsible for the prevention of epilepsy and cellular death caused by this drug (Hebert et al., 1994).

<a id='02952628-8b5c-4f30-aa81-71f773c429a5'></a>

Riluzole has also been reported to activate multiple types of K+ channels, including small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels (Grunnet et al., 2001) and large-conductance Ca2+-
activated K+ (BKCa) channels (Wu and Li, 1999). Its activation of BKCa channels may also account for the inhibitory action on excitatory neurotransmission (Salkoff et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006). Thus, the mechanism of action of riluzole on ion channels appears to be complex in multiple types of cells. Although riluzole can inhibit voltage-gated Na+ channel and modulate BKCa channels in neurons or endocrine cells (Zona et al., 1998; Wu and Li, 1999), the precise mechanism of actions of this drug largely remains unknown in skeletal muscle cells per se.

<a id='f28a3480-46fd-4538-97f2-ce2de30a6d7d'></a>

The large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ (BKCa) channels,
the product of a nearly ubiquitous, alternatively spliced gene
(_SLO_ or _KCNMA1_), have been thought to play a role in

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='1430d348-1d2e-4056-b0fe-ced9551c29b8'></a>

12

<a id='e715a133-92f0-4082-8ad5-ed30d5be1e73'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='23ba2131-321b-43b3-b79b-4dc88a6bc65d'></a>

regulating excitability of skeletal muscle fibers (Tricarico et al., 2005; Salkoff et al., 2006). They can be synergistically gated open in response to intracellular Ca2+ and membrane depolar-ization (Nimigean and Magleby, 1999; Salkoff et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006). Skeletal muscle cells are long known to functionally express BKca channels (Moczydlowski and Latorre, 1983; Nimigean and Magleby, 1999), which may mediate responsiveness to relaxant agents and therefore repre-sent a potential target in the treatment of skeletal muscle dis-orders (Tricarico et al., 2005). Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of riluzole to activate BKca channels in pituitary tumor (GH3) cells and in pheochromocytoma PC12 cells (Wu and Li, 1999).

<a id='49b460e6-32c1-4796-a90a-d3ac30e5382e'></a>

Therefore, in this study, we attempted (1) to identify the protein expression of ion channels (i.e., α-subunits for BKCa-channel and NaV1.5) in cultured differentiated human skeletal muscle cells (dHSkMCs); (2) determine the effect of riluzole on macroscopic K+ currents in these cells, and (3) to address the issue of whether this drug can have any effects on BKCa channels and Na+ current (INa) in these cells. In our study, we provide substantial evidence that this drug can directly interact with the BKCa channel to increase Ca2+-activated K+ current (IK(Ca)) and inhibit INa in dHSkMCs.

<a id='a6e0bda4-c270-41cb-89de-b5e790a7ec64'></a>

Materials and methods

Cell preparations

The cultured human skeletal muscle cells (HSkMCs), originally isolated from the skeletal muscle of hamstrings, were obtained from Cell Applications, Inc. (San Diego, CA) (http://www.cellapplications.com). Cells were cryopreserved at second passage, and cultured and propagated at least 15 population doublings. Undifferentiated HSkMCs (uHSkMCs) were routinely cultured in skeletal muscle cell growth medium (No. 151-500; Cell Applications, Inc.) in 75 cm plastic culture flasks in a humidified environment containing 5% CO2/95% air. The skeletal muscle cell differentiation medium (No. 151D-250; Cell Applications, Inc.) was supplemented to promote cell differentiation in culture. Cells could undergo differentiation, as they exhibited actin and myosin myofilaments within 9 days when cultured in this medium. In our preparations, some of differentiated HSkMCs (dHSkMCs) were found to beat spontaneously. At confluence, cells obtained from flasks were passaged using 0.25–0.5% trypsin in 0.02% EDTA. The medium was replaced twice weekly. All cultures were grown to confluence before measurements were made.

<a id='3982a0b4-f417-4470-8b1c-c361d2c2c74c'></a>

The H9c2 cell line, derived from embryonic rat ventricles, was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection ([CRL-1446], Manassas, VA). Cells were grown in monolayer culture in 50 ml plastic culture flasks in a humidified envi- ronment of 5% CO2/95% air at 37 C. Cells were maintained at a density of 106/ml in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum and 2 mM glutamine. Experiments were performed 5 or 6 days after cells were subcultured (60–80% confluence). To induce cell differentiation, retinoic acid (10 nM) in differentiated medium

<a id='961df984-c967-46cf-9035-16aed74b5b66'></a>

(1% fetal calf serum) was treated for 7–10 days. Under these differentiating conditions, cardiac and skeletal L-type Ca2ⁱ currents could be identified (Ménard et al., 1999).

<a id='b1047abc-80e5-4f63-9326-69939197bd47'></a>

Western blot analysis
Total proteins were extracted from uHSkMCs and dHSkMCs with a commercial protein extraction reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL). An equivalent protein extract from each sample was separated by 10% sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide-gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to a PVDF membrane (Amersham Corp., Cardiff, UK). Subsequently, the membranes were blocked with TBS containing 5% non-fat milk for 1 h and then incubated for overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies such as anti-p27 antibody (1/1000) (Chemicon, Temecula, CA), anti-ẞ-actin antibody (1/5000) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), anti-BKca (or anti-Kcal.1) (1/1000) or anti-human Naᵥ1.5 (1/1000) (Alomone Labs, Jerusalem, Israel). Blots were washed four times for 15 min with 0.3% Tween 20-containing TBS and then incubated for 1 h with peroxidase-labeled anti-mouse or anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (1/2000) (Amersham Corp.). Blots were developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (ECL-plus; Amersham Corp.).

<a id='c691cf83-0bf7-49e0-85d0-f7574a06c326'></a>

Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)

RT-PCR was used for detection of the SCN5A gene transcript, as the SCN5A gene encodes the α-subunit of voltage-gated Na⁺ channel (i.e., Naᵥ1.5). Total RNAs in uHSkMCs and dHSkMCs were isolated using the TRIzol method (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Reverse transcription was performed with the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen) protocol. RNAs were used in the reaction, and random primers were also used for the initiation of cDNA synthesis. After this RT procedure, the cDNA was used for PCR. PCR was performed with Invitrogen PCR system with Taq polymerase. The primers for Naᵥ1.5 were then used to amplify a 410-base-pair (bp) fragment. The forward primer was 5'-(CAGGACTTCTATGAAGCCACG)-3', which extends from nucleotides 1698 to 1718, and the reverse primer was 5'-(AAGCCATCTACACACGGAGC)-3', which extends from nucleotides 2089 to 2108 (Wang et al., 1996). The protocol for RT-PCR was used in this study as previously described (Donahue et al., 2000). Briefly, amplification conditions were 95 °C for 5 min, 30 cycles of 94 °C for 1 min, 62 °C for 1.5 min, and 72 °C for 1 min, followed by incubation at 72 °C for 5 min. The PCR products were analyzed by electrophoresis on 1.8% agarose gels and ethidium bromide staining.

<a id='9a677958-8671-4bcd-bd4b-0666f33ef09e'></a>

_Electrophysiological measurements_

Immediately before each experiment, cells were dissociated
and an aliquot of cell suspension was transferred to a recording
chamber positioned on the stage of an inverted microscope (DM
IL; Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Cells were bathed
at room temperature (20–25 °C) in normal Tyrode's solution
containing 1.8 mM CaCl2. Patch pipettes were pulled from

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='4207b6c8-de75-4ed3-9fbc-9da0091acf7d'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='ff117abe-a090-40d1-a65d-a80027813e98'></a>

13

<a id='dd4101e4-6bf6-4593-9de9-2c1811ab255b'></a>

Kimax-51 capillary tubes (Kimble Glass, Vineland, NJ) using a vertical two-step electrode puller (PP-830; Narishige, Tokyo, Japan), and the tips were fire-polished with a microforge (MF-83; Narishige). The electrodes had resistances of 3 to 5 MΩ when filled with the pipette solutions. Ion currents were measured in the whole cell, cell-attached or inside-out mode of the patch-clamp technique with an RK-400 amplifier (Biologic, Claix, France) or an Axopatch-200B amplifier (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) (Wang et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2007). All potentials were corrected for liquid junction potential, a value that would develop at the tip of the electrode when the composition of the internal solution was different from that in the bath. Spontaneous beating observed in dHSkMCs was recorded for 10–20 min in the control and during the exposure to riluzole. In these experiments, the inverted microscope was coupled to a digital video camera (DCR-TRV30; Sony, Tokyo, Japan) with a magnification up to 1500× to monitor cell size and beating in a Dell 2407WFP-HC LCD monitor (Round Rock, TX).

<a id='ff1981fc-3ca5-4ae8-9910-0c44dc6ca131'></a>

## Data recordings and analyses
The signals were displayed on an analog/digital oscilloscope (HM 507; Hameg Inc., East Meadow, NY) and a liquid crystal projector (AV600; Delta, Taipei, Taiwan). Electrophysiological data were on-line stored in a laptop computer (Slimnote VX3; Lemel, Taipei, Taiwan) via a universal serial bus port at 10 kHz through a Digidata-1322A interface (Molecular Devices), which was controlled by the pCLAMP 9.0 software (Molecular Devices). Currents were low-pass filtered at 1 or 3 kHz. Ion currents were stored and analyzed using the pCLAMP 9.0 software (Molecular Devices), the Origin 7.5 software (Micro-cal Software, Inc., Northampton, MA), or custom-made macros in Microsoft Excel (Redmont, WA).

<a id='4609dbaf-282e-44b7-b8b8-05883d4b11b9'></a>

The concentration-response relationship for riluzole-induced inhibition of I_Na in dHSkMCs was determined by the Hill equation using a nonlinear regression analysis (Origin 7.5; Microcal Software). That is, percentage inhibition = (E_max × [C]^nh) / (IC_50^nh + [C]^nh), where [C] is the riluzole concentration; IC_50 and nh are the half-maximum concentration of riluzole and the Hill coefficient, respectively; and E_max is maximal inhibition of I_Na induced by this drug.

<a id='f18064b1-5268-4eb2-8ec2-f327102a5160'></a>

The amplitudes of single BKCa-channel currents obtained in the absence and presence of riluzole were determined by fitting Gaussian distributions to the amplitude histograms of the closed and the open states. The activity of the channel in a patch was expressed as N·Po, which can be estimated using the following equation: N·Po=(A₁ + 2A₂ + 3A₃ + ... + nAₙ) / (A₀ + A₁ + A₂ + A₃ + ... + Aₙ), where N is the number of active channels in the patch, A₀ is the area under the curve of an all-points histogram corresponding to the closed state, and A₁...Aₙ represent the histogram areas reflecting the levels of distinct open state for 1 to n channels in the patch. The single-channel conductance was calculated by a linear regression using averaged amplitudes measured at different voltages (Origin 7.5; Microcal Software).

<a id='ccf27b51-1bb1-4713-bd69-b8f6f4734e1b'></a>

Values were provided as meansSEM with sample sizes (*n*)
indicating the number of cells from which the data were
obtained. The paired or unpaired Student's *t*-test and one-way

<a id='99e52dfb-53a9-4606-bd71-6cd0369959db'></a>

analysis of variance with the least-significance-difference method for multiple comparisons were used for the statistical evaluation of differences among means. Statistical significance was determined at a P value of <0.05.

<a id='2b3e559d-ea3e-4268-9815-4fb9a583e707'></a>

*Drugs and solutions*
Riluzole (Tocris Cookson Inc., Bristol, UK) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide to make a 100 mM stock solution and then appropriately diluted with bath solution in which dimethyl sulfoxide is less than 0.01%. Ionomycin and paxilline were purchased from Biomol Research Laboratories (Plymouth Meeting, PA), and tetrodotoxin and diosgenin were from Sigma. Iberiotoxin and apamin were obtained from Alomone Labs.

<a id='d494e12a-4c26-4a91-93a8-43942de50eb7'></a>

The composition of normal Tyrode's solution was 136.5 mM NaCl, 5.4 mM KCl, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 0.53 mM MgCl2, 5.5 mM glucose and 5.5 mM HEPES-NaOH buffer, pH 7.4. To record K+ currents or membrane potential, the recording pipette was back-filled with a solution consisting of 140 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 3 mM Na2ATP, 0.1 mM Na2GTP, 0.1 mM EGTA and 5 mM HEPES-KOH buffer, pH 7.2. For single-channel current recordings, the high-K+ bathing solution contained 145 mM KCl, 0.53 MgCl2 and 5 mM HEPES-KOH buffer, pH 7.4, and the pipette solution contained 145 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM HEPES-KOH buffer, pH 7.2. The value of free Ca2+ concentration was calculated assuming a dissociation constant for EGTA and Ca2+ (at pH 7.2) of 0.1 µM. To provide 0.1 µM free Ca2+ in bath solution, 0.5 mM CaCl2 and 1 mM EGTA were added. To measure Na+ current, K+ ions inside the pipette solution were replaced with equimolar Cs+ ions, and the pH was adjusted to 7.2 with CsOH.

<a id='7dae1f0b-b673-4d34-9131-161bd66c971e'></a>

*Computer simulations*

Action potentials in skeletal muscle cells were mathematically reconstructed with the use of the modeling of skeletal action potential as reported previously (Adrian et al., 1970). The basic model consists of an INa, a skeletal L-type Ca^2+^ current, and a delayed rectifier K^+^ current. The model presented here also take into account IK(Ca) to which the BKCa channel contributes, given that this current is consistently present in skeletal muscle cells (Moczydlowski and Latorre, 1983; Keener and Keizer, 2002; Tricarico et al., 2005). Simulations were performed using Euler algorithm as implemented in the program xpp with the aid of the X-Win32 version of XPPAUT on a Hewlett Packard (HP xw9300) Workstation (Palo Alto, CA) (Keen et al., 2002). The source file used in this study is available at http://senselab.med.yale.edu/senselab/modeldb. In the present simulations, the conductance values and reversal potentials, together with other parameters, used to solve the set of differential equations are listed in Table 1.

<a id='060dbf8f-b186-428a-b586-e70873b4f8fc'></a>

## Results

_Elevation of the p27 expression in dHSkMCs_

<a id='52b294f3-9ddf-4340-a11b-b895b92f5f47'></a>

In an initial set of experiments, we determined whether
uHSkMCs could be differentiated after being cultured in

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='4bde230c-5508-4a5c-b7b4-a306f1c1beff'></a>

14

<a id='ab3d0f4f-0d0f-4de8-97e4-4f03df777748'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11-20

<a id='f91f5fea-ad3c-4163-a265-feee59cb0b03'></a>

Table 1
Default parameter values used for the modeling of human skeletal muscle cells
<table id="3-1">
<tr><td id="3-2">Symbol</td><td id="3-3">Description</td><td id="3-4">Value</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-5">Cm</td><td id="3-6">Membrane capacitance</td><td id="3-7">9.0 nF</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-8">gNa</td><td id="3-9">Na⁺ current conductance</td><td id="3-a">0.90 nS</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-b">gCa</td><td id="3-c">Ca²⁺ current conductance</td><td id="3-d">0.05 nS</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-e">gK</td><td id="3-f">K⁺ current conductance</td><td id="3-g">0.42 nS</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-h">gK(Ca)</td><td id="3-i">Ca²-activated K⁺ current conductance</td><td id="3-j">0.50 nS</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-k">VNa</td><td id="3-l">Na⁺ reversal potential</td><td id="3-m">50 mV</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-n">VC</td><td id="3-o">Ca²⁺ reversal potential</td><td id="3-p">50 mV</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-q">VK</td><td id="3-r">K⁺ reversal potential</td><td id="3-s">-70 mV</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='1399fb46-29fd-4e4b-8070-6f1153b2d68d'></a>

differentiated medium. The total protein extracts from HSkMCs
overgrown in growth and differentiated medium were respec-
tively submitted to electrophoresis in SDS-PAGE gels (10%).
Western blotting analyses were performed by transferring the
proteins onto PVDF and using p27 antibody against the
indicated proteins. The proteins known to inhibit p27 cyclin-
dependent kinase inhibitors are representative inducers of cell
cycle arrest at the G1 phase, as they were increased when cell
differentiation was induced (Taniguchi et al., 1999). As
expected, treatment of HSkMCs with differentiated medium
was found to cause a significant increase in the p27 expression
in dHSkMCs. Our results suggest that HSkMCs can undergo
differentiated when they are grown in differentiated medium for
9 days.

<a id='c285b3cb-107e-4fab-8e72-ba2ff0da1c9e'></a>

*The level of mRNA expression for SCN5A in HSkMCs*

Voltage-gated Na+ channels play a critical role in membrane electrogenesis and repetitive firing of excitable cells. In the skeletal muscle cells, the INa is largely carried by Nav1.5, the a-subunit of which the SCN5A gene encodes (Kallen et al., 1990; Shang and Dudley, 2005). Therefore, we also examined the mRNA levels of Nav1.5 a-subunit on HSkMCs cultured in conditions promoting cell differentiation. Cells were differentiated after being cultured in the differentiated medium for 9 days. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that the mRNA expression of Nav1.5 in either uHSkMCs or dHSkMCs was similar. Therefore, in our experimental conditions, the extent of mRNA expression for Nav1.5 in HSkMCs incubated with differentiated medium remains unaltered.

<a id='1a0e55c8-6828-4551-b7e0-89e09547756e'></a>

Immunodetection of the α-subunits for both BKCa channel and NaV1.5 in uHSkMCs and dHSkMCs

Because the mRNA expression of NaV1.5 between uHSkMCs and dHSkMCs was not found to differ, the protein expression of NaV1.5 was further analyzed. A band was detected at a relative molecular weight of ~220 kDa as expected for the Nav1.5 α-subunit (Boixel et al., 2006). In addition, the protein expression of Nav1.5 α-subunit was significantly increased in dHSkMCs (Fig. 1). It is thus tempting to speculate that changes in the intracellular vesicular trafficking are the important mechanisms through which in the Na+-channel expression during cell differentiation is regulated (Kobayashi et al., 2002).

<a id='2fdbee61-08e2-4e1b-bd91-276908db33ea'></a>

<::Western blot image with two panels, A and B. Both panels show two lanes, labeled "dHSKMC" (differentiated HSkMCs) on the left and "uHSKMC" (undifferentiated HSkMCs) on the right.

Panel A: An arrow points to a protein band labeled "Na_v 1.5". The band in the "dHSKMC" lane is significantly darker and wider than the band in the "uHSKMC" lane, indicating higher expression in dHSKMC.

Panel B: An arrow points to a protein band labeled "BK_Ca". The bands in both the "dHSKMC" and "uHSKMC" lanes appear to be of similar intensity and size, suggesting comparable expression levels.

Fig. 1. The protein expression of α-subunits for NaV1.5 and BKCa channel in HSkMCs. Western blotting analysis demonstrated an increase in the expression of NaV1.5 α-subunits after HSkMCs were differentiated (A); however, the expression level of BKCa-channel α-subunit (BKCa) in either uHSkMCs or dHSkMCs was similar (B).
: figure::>

<a id='16e0c5ad-b0d4-40ce-8833-101b94109615'></a>

The increase in protein expression of Na₇1.5 α-subunit appears
to be involved in protein trafficking when HSkMCs undergo
differentiation. In contrast, the protein expression for BK₇ₐₐ-
channel α-subunit did not differ between uHSkMCs and
dHSkMCs (Fig. 1B). The major band was detected at a relative
molecular weight of ~ 120 kDa as expected for the α-subunit of
the BK₇ₐₐ channel in HCN-1A neuronal cells (Wang et al.,
2006).

<a id='ad627bad-6590-4f15-b621-2f1128ca7f25'></a>

Effect of riluzole on the frequency of cell contraction in dHSkMCs

<a id='1a0e41f1-3e80-4fe4-95d6-37b67e9fa199'></a>

In our preparations, about 10% of dHSkMCs were found to beat spontaneously. Therefore, in the initial set of experiments, we examined whether riluzole had any effects on beating dHSkMCs. As shown in Fig. 2, when cells were exposed to riluzole, the contractile rate was significantly reduced. For example, riluzole at a concentration of 10 µM decreased the rate of beating from 7.5±1.2 to 2.1±0.8 beats/min (n=6). The results suggest that this drug is able to suppress contractile rate in dHSkMCs.

<a id='03e489fa-228d-4ce4-b36e-e9a05d533002'></a>

<::bar chart: A bar chart titled "The inhibitory effect of riluzole on contractile rate in dHSkMCs." The y-axis is labeled "Contractile rate (bpm)" and ranges from 0 to 9, with major ticks at 0, 3, 6, and 9. The x-axis shows three conditions: "control", "riluzole (3 μM)", and "riluzole (10 μM)". The control bar has a height of approximately 7.5 bpm. The riluzole (3 μM) bar has a height of approximately 4.5 bpm and is marked with an asterisk (*). The riluzole (10 μM) bar has a height of approximately 2.5 bpm and is also marked with an asterisk (*). All bars include error bars.: Fig. 2. The inhibitory effect of riluzole on contractile rate in dHSkMCs. Cell contraction was measured for 2–3 min in the absence and presence of riluzole. Each point represents the mean±SEM (n=4–6). *Significantly different from control.::>

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='fd031051-68ab-4c74-a892-c335d76d8ab1'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='47e80ee4-252d-4490-8288-14d261939dcc'></a>

15

<a id='fa77a0c4-0f59-4fa1-93a4-b4741a6adef3'></a>

<::Figure: The image contains three panels, A, B, and C, displaying electrophysiological and pharmacological data.

Panel A: Shows current traces in response to a voltage step. The top part of the panel displays the voltage protocol, a step from -80 mV to -60 mV. The bottom part shows current amplitude (pA) versus time (msec). Several current traces are shown, with arrows indicating different phases: 1 points to the peak inward current, 2 points to the decaying phase of the current, 3 points to a sustained inward current, and 4 points to a very small, late current. The y-axis ranges from -3000 pA to 0 pA, and the x-axis ranges from 0 msec to 160 msec.

Panel B: Presents a current-voltage (I-V) relationship graph, plotting current amplitude (pA) against membrane potential (mV). There are two curves: one with open circles and another with filled circles, both with error bars. Both curves show an inward current that peaks around -50 mV to -40 mV and then decreases, becoming outward or near zero at more positive potentials. The filled circles generally show a larger inward current compared to the open circles. The y-axis ranges from 0 pA to -3000 pA, and the x-axis ranges from -80 mV to 20 mV.

Panel C: Displays a dose-response curve showing percentage inhibition (%) versus [Riluzole], μM on a logarithmic scale. The data points are represented by open squares with error bars, and a sigmoidal curve is fitted through them. The curve shows increasing inhibition with increasing concentrations of Riluzole, reaching a plateau near 100% inhibition at higher concentrations. The y-axis ranges from 0% to 100%, and the x-axis ranges from 0.1 μM to 100 μM.
: figure::>

<a id='7e265d79-fb84-4d67-8fea-31edfca165ac'></a>

Fig. 3. Riluzole-induced inhibition of voltage-gated Na+ current (INa) in dHSkMCs. (A) Current traces obtained in the absence and presence of riluzole. (1) control; (2) 3 μΜ; (3) 10 μΜ; (4) 30 µM. In these experiments, cells were bathed in Ca2+-free Tyrode's solution. The cell was depolarized from - 80 to 50 mV. The uppermost part in (A) indicates the voltage protocol used. (B) Averaged current-voltage (I-V) relationships of INa obtained in controls and during the exposure to riluzole (3 μΜ). (C) Concentration-response curve for riluzole-induced inhibition of INa. INa recorded from each cell was evoked in response to membrane depolarization from -80 to -50 mV. The peak amplitude of INa during cell exposure to riluzole at different concentrations was compared with the control value, i.e., in the absence of riluzole (mean±SEM; n=5-8 for each point). The smooth line represents a nonlinear fit to the Hill equation as described in Materials and methods. The value for IC50, the maximally inhibited percentage of INa, and the Hill coefficient were 2.3 µM, 100%, and 1.2, respectively.

<a id='6d3fdc93-c141-4f35-b1c7-17e77c4a3543'></a>

*Inhibitory effect of riluzole on voltage-gated Na$^{+}$ current ($I_{Na}$)
in dHSkMCs*

<a id='35a51652-d9c5-4b5b-afc9-2c38c0c95fd5'></a>

Because riluzole could affect cell contraction, we further studied the underlying mechanism of its actions on ion currents in dHSkMCs. In an initial set of electrophysiological experiments, we examined the effect of this drug on I_Na. The experiments were conducted with Cs$^{+}$-containing pipette solution and dHSkMCs were bathed in Ca$^{2+}$-free Tyrode's solution. As shown in Fig. 3A, the cell was held at -80 mV, and I_Na was elicited in response to a series of depolarizing voltage pulses. When cells were exposed to riluzole, the peak amplitude of I_Na was significantly reduced. For example, when cells were depolarized from -80 to -50 mV, the addition of riluzole (3 µM) decreased the amplitude of I_Na from 2727±285 pA to 1708±220 (n=6). After washout of this compound, the peak amplitude was increased to 2456±265 pA (n=5). Similarly, tetrodotoxin (1 µM) could suppress the amplitude of I_Na by about 40% in these cells. Fig. 3B illustrates the averaged current–voltage (I–V) relationships for I_Na obtained with or without application of riluzole (3 µM). The results showed that this drug was able to block tetrodotoxin-resistant I_Na with no change in overall I–V configuration of this current in dHSkMCs.

<a id='64f6bc6d-4bfc-4578-ac41-f1a36e7d8d7f'></a>

The relationship between the riluzole concentration and the
percentage inhibition of I~Na~ was constructed. As shown in
Fig. 3C, riluzole (0.3–30 µM) suppressed the peak amplitude of
I~Na~ in a concentration-dependent manner. The IC50 value for
riluzole-induced inhibition of I~Na~ was 2.3 µM. This drug at a
concentration of 30 µM almost completely suppressed the
amplitude of I~Na~. The results demonstrate that riluzole can have
a significant action on the inhibition of I~Na~ present in
dHSkMCs.

<a id='cdfc4520-f58a-4b80-aa17-33595e0d7831'></a>

Stimulatory effect of riluzole on Ca2+-activated K+ current (IK(Ca))
in dHSkMCS

<a id='94a5444b-993e-410a-80e7-29ac572ed2d0'></a>

Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of riluzole to activate the activity of BKca channels in pituitary GH3 cells (Wu and Li, 1999). We next attempted to investigate the possible effect of this drug on IK(Ca) in dHSkMCs. In these experiments, cells were bathed in normal Tyrode's solution containing 1.8 mM CaCl2 during experiments and patch pipettes were filled with a solution containing 3 mM ATP and 0.1 mM EGTA. Each cell was held at the level of 0 mV in order to inactivate other types of voltage-gated K+ channels. As shown in Fig. 4A, when the cell was held at 0 mV, the depolarizing voltage steps (from 0 to +140 mV, increment

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='ca28deb0-73f0-42ef-9b72-cc4dc8f3dcd1'></a>

16

<a id='4c29d4f7-1a91-4bf4-83c1-497f76fcc5d2'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='08dc0d2b-33d6-4824-9f92-064a8daa86b4'></a>

<::chart: A three-part figure illustrating the effect of riluzole on Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ outward current (IK(Ca)) in dHSkMCs. (A) Original current traces obtained in the absence (upper) and presence (lower) of riluzole (10 µM). The uppermost part in (A) indicates the voltage protocol used, showing voltage steps from 0 to 120 mV over 300 ms. The middle panel, labeled "control", shows current amplitude (pA) ranging from 0 to 6000 pA over 400 msec. The bottom panel, labeled "riluzole", shows current amplitude (pA) ranging from 0 to 6000 pA over 400 msec, with visibly larger currents compared to control. (B) Averaged I–V relationships of IK(Ca) measured at the end of each voltage pulse. The x-axis represents Membrane potential (mV) from 0 to 160 mV, and the y-axis represents Current amplitude (pA) from 0 to 6000 pA. Data points are shown for control (filled circles), during exposure to 10 µM riluzole (open circles), and washout of riluzole (open squares). Riluzole significantly increases current amplitude compared to control. (C) Bar graph showing the effect of riluzole on IK(Ca) in the absence and presence of paxilline, iberiotoxin, or apamin. The x-axis shows different conditions: control, Ril (riluzole), Ril+Pax (riluzole + paxilline), Ril+Iber (riluzole + iberiotoxin), and Ril+Apa (riluzole + apamin). The y-axis represents Current amplitude (pA) from 0 to 1200 pA. Riluzole significantly increases current compared to control (*), and this increase is significantly attenuated by paxilline (**) and iberiotoxin (**), but not by apamin. Error bars represent mean±SEM.Fig. 4. Effect of riluzole on Ca²⁺-activated K⁺ outward current (IK(Ca)) in dHSkMCs. In these experiments, cells were bathed in normal Tyrode’s solution containing 1.8 mM CaCl₂ and CdCl₂ (0.5 mM). Each cell was depolarized from 0 mV to various potentials ranging from 0 to +140 mV in 10-mV increments with a duration of 300 ms. (A) Original current traces obtained in the absence (upper) and presence (lower) of riluzole (10 µM). The uppermost part in (A) indicates the voltage protocol used. (B) Averaged I–V relationships of IK(Ca) measured at the end of each voltage pulse in the control (●), during exposure to 10 µM riluzole (○), and washout of riluzole (☐). Each point represents the mean±SEM (n=5–9). (C) The effect of riluzole on IK(Ca) in the absence and presence of paxilline, iberiotoxin, or apamin. Each cell was depolarized from 0 to +80 mV and current amplitude was measured at the end of depolarizing pulse. Ril: riluzole (10 µM); Pax: paxilline (1 µM); Iber: iberiotoxin (200 nM); Apa: apamin (200 nM). Each point represents the mean±SEM (n=6–10). *Significantly different from control group. **Significantly different from riluzole-alone group.::>

<a id='8a3260e7-a0e3-412a-ad3f-909557c8b996'></a>

10 mV) could elicit a family of large noisy, outward currents with an outward rectification. Interestingly, within 1 min of exposing cells to riluzole, the amplitude of IK(Ca) was greatly increased throughout the entire range of voltage-clamp steps. This stimulatory effect was readily reversed after the removal of riluzole. Fig. 4B shows the averaged I-V relationships for IK(Ca) obtained in control experiments, and during exposure to and following washout of riluzole. In addition, riluzole-induced increase in the amplitude of IK(Ca) could be reversed by further application of paxilline (1 µM) or iberiotoxin (200 nM), but not by apamin (200 nM) (Fig. 4C). In parallel with previous observations in pituitary GH3 cells (Wu and Li, 1999), the results suggest that riluzole (10 µM) has a stimulatory effect on IK(Ca) in dHSkMCs. Riluzole-induced increase in IK(Ca) could be reversed by a further application of paxilline or iberiotoxin.

<a id='c669ee82-91e1-4486-a2f0-39238aa90753'></a>

Stimulatory effect of riluzole on BKCa-channel activity in dHSkMCs

<a id='3dce199b-0b91-42f2-9b39-0aacdfa6a287'></a>

To characterize stimulatory effect of riluzole on I_K(Ca), we
further determined how this drug could interact with single
BK_Ca channels seen in dHSkMCs. In this series of experiments,
single-channel recordings with inside-out configuration were
conducted with a symmetrical K+ concentration (145 mM), and
bath medium contained 0.1 µM Ca2+. Notably, as shown in

<a id='f20c2136-1f2f-45da-8944-b2fb746f0c33'></a>

Fig. 5A, when the potential was held at +60 mV, application of riluzole to the bath caused a drastic increase in the activity of BKCa channels. For example, the probability of channel openings was significantly increased from 0.011±0.0018 to 0.0236±0.0013 (n=6) in the presence of this drug. Consistent with the effect on IK(Ca), paxilline at a concentration of 1 µM could effectively reverse its effect on the probability of channel openings (Fig. 5B). In addition, kinetic analyses showed that riluzole produced a significant shortening in channel closed time (Fig. 5C), although no apparent change in single-channel conductance of BKCa channels was observed in dHSkMCs. Changes in mean closed times caused by this drug may thus account primarily for its stimulatory effect on the activity of BKCa channels expressed in dHSkMCs.

<a id='a6fd9057-6b1b-4948-91a3-dfa88e51106b'></a>

Effect of riluzole on action potentials in a modeled dHSkMC

In order to explore how riluzole affects action potentials in skeletal muscle cells, a cell model designed to mimic skeletal muscle action potential was also generated in this study. As shown in Fig. 6, in the control, action potential was generated every 50 ms with a peak amplitude of 93 mV. When the maximal conductance of I<sub>Na</sub> was decreased from 0.9 to 0.18 nS to mimic inhibitory effect of riluzole (10 μΜ) on I<sub>Na</sub>, the height of spike discharge was reduced to 60 mV (Fig. 6B). Along with

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='78b3e075-56f0-4711-a15c-81f4bb926771'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='80dd433a-147a-4aa8-8275-6b8905cb59e9'></a>

17

<a id='2e51182a-f245-4cae-9387-7114ea901ccc'></a>

<::figure
: Fig. 5. Stimulatory effect of riluzole on BKCa-channel activity in dHSkMCs. In these experiments, dHSkMCs were bathed in symmetrical K⁺ solution (145 mM). Inside-out configuration was made at +60 mV and bath medium contained 0.1 µM Ca²⁺.

(A) Original current traces obtained in the absence (left) and presence (right) of 10 µM riluzole (Ril).
  - Left panel (control):
    - Y-axis: Current amplitude (pA), ranging from 0 to 30.
    - Two traces showing fluctuating current amplitudes (spikes) over time.
  - Right panel (Ril):
    - Y-axis: Current amplitude (pA), ranging from 0 to 30.
    - Two traces showing increased fluctuating current amplitudes (spikes) over time compared to control.
    - X-axis scale bar: 1 sec.

(B) Bar graph showing the effects of riluzole and riluzole plus paxilline (Pax) on the open probability in dHSkMCs. Each point represents the mean ± SEM (n=5–9). In the experiments on the effect of riluzole plus paxilline, paxilline (1 µM) was applied in continued presence of riluzole (10 µM).
  - Y-axis: Open probability, ranging from 0.00 to 0.03.
  - X-axis categories:
    - control: Bar height approximately 0.011.
    - Ril (3 µM): Bar height approximately 0.017, marked with one asterisk (*).
    - Ril (10 µM): Bar height approximately 0.023, marked with one asterisk (*).
    - Ril (10 µM) + Pax (1 µM): Bar height approximately 0.015, marked with two asterisks (**).
  - All bars include error bars.

(C) In (C), kinetic analyses showed that riluzole (3 and 10 µM) produced a significant decrease in channel closed time (τc) (mean ± SEM; n=4–8 for each point).
  - Y-axis: τc (msec), ranging from 0 to 80.
  - X-axis categories:
    - control: Data point at approximately 65 msec.
    - Ril (3 µM): Data point at approximately 45 msec.
    - Ril (10 µM): Data point at approximately 15 msec.
  - Line connecting data points, all with error bars, showing a decreasing trend.::>

<a id='622dd976-313b-4162-be26-f09661e1660a'></a>

<::chart: Fig. 6. Effect of riluzole on action potentials in a modeled dHSkMC. The figure displays three panels (A, B, C) showing membrane potential (mV) on the y-axis against time (msec) on the x-axis, illustrating action potentials under different conditions. In (A), the control condition shows action potentials generated every 50 ms with a peak amplitude of 93 mV. The parameters for this panel are gNa=0.9 nS and gK(Ca)=0.5 nS. In (B), when maximal conductance of INa was decreased to 0.45 nS (from 0.9 nS in the caption, though the caption states 0.18 nS, the image shows 0.45 nS), while gK(Ca)=0.5 nS, the height of action potential was reduced to 60 mV. In (C), together with decreased conductance of INa (gNa=0.45 nS), an increase in maximal conductance of IK(Ca) from 0.5 to 1.0 nS, which was used to mimic the action of riluzole (10 µM), further decreased the spike amplitude to 53 mV, and the shortening of action potentials was observed.::>

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='1f729428-7242-432b-bc0b-a7e9615c57a6'></a>

18

<a id='3c77bba5-470e-426a-8b7c-4b297fe65436'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='4f6c6a78-e55d-42cb-ab06-8e7476d438b5'></a>

the decrease conductance of I<sub>Na</sub>, the increased conductance of I<sub>K(Ca)</sub> from 0.5 to 1.0 nS further decreased the height of action potential to 53 mV, and the shortening of action potentials was observed (Fig. 6C). Based on this theoretical model, the results were found to closely resemble our experimental observations showing that application of riluzole (10 µM) was able to block I<sub>Na</sub> and stimulate I<sub>K(Ca)</sub>. Taken together, it is tempting to propose that both Na<sup>+</sup> and BK<sub>Ca</sub> channels are important targets of modification by this compound with which action potentials, along with simultaneous change in ion currents, can be apparently altered in human skeletal muscle fibers in vivo.

<a id='7db275b4-be6b-4b1a-b9ef-19e540eddd7f'></a>

## Discussion

In this study, we have demonstrated that riluzole could block I$_{Na}$ functionally expressed in dHSkMCs. In addition, the activity of BK$_{Ca}$ channels recorded from dHSkMCs was also activated in the presence of this drug. The data are compatible with the results showing that it could reduce the spontaneous beating in these cells. Therefore, this drug may directly cause muscle relaxation through both blockade of I$_{Na}$ and stimulation of BK$_{Ca}$-channel activity. The IC$_{50}$ value of riluzole required for the inhibition of I$_{Na}$ in dHSkMCs was 2.3 µM in this study. This value appears to be of the same order of magnitude as the concentration used for the management of progressive muscle deterioration (Doble, 1996; Kennel et al., 2000). Ion channels present in skeletal muscle fiber per se can be an important target for the action of this drug.

<a id='ed0e9f54-234c-42d1-a769-72e1b2770e8b'></a>

Consistent with previous studies (Nimigean and Magleby, 1999; Tricarico et al., 2005; Bingham et al., 2006), this study clearly demonstrated the presence of BKca channels in human skeletal muscle cells. Paxilline or iberitoxin was found to block IK(Ca) in these cells. Paxilline, an indole alkaloid isolated from Penicillium paxilli, has been known as an inhibitor of BKca channels (Wu et al., 2006). In single-channel recordings, the single-channel conductance of BKca channels seen in HSkMCs, was 176\u00b17 pS (n=9), a value that is similar to that of prototypical BKca channels present in skeletal muscle cells (Moczydlowski and Latorre, 1983; Tricarico et al., 2005; Bingham et al., 2006). However, this value is apparently greater than that of small-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels found in differentiated H9c2 myoblast (Wang et al., 1999). Therefore, not all myoblasts in culture can express the activity of BKca channels. In addition, BKca-channel activity recorded with cell-attached configuration was increased 2 min after exposure to ionomycin (10 \u00b5M) or diosgenin (10 \u00b5M). These compounds were reported to elevate intracellular Ca2+ (Wang et al., 2006). Immunoblot studies shown here have also revealed the presence of BKca-channel \u03b1-subunit which is similar to a previous study in cultured human cortical neurons (Wang et al., 2006). Taken together, it is anticipated that because of their large single-channel conductance, the activity of BKca channels can mainly constitute the generation of whole-cell IK (Ca) in HSkMCs, yet not in differentiated H9c2 myoblasts (Nimigean and Magleby, 1999; Salkoff et al., 2006). Consistent with previous reports in endocrine cells (Wu and Li, 1999), this study also demonstrated that riluzole at clinically relevant concentrations could increase the activity of BKca channels

<a id='87ab30f0-a716-40d0-9048-b62fcde8ce85'></a>

accompanied by a shortening in mean closed time of the channels in dHSkMCs.

<a id='0a18abc0-7f1a-46c4-b75f-840558e2380b'></a>

The stimulatory effect of riluzole on the BKCa channel thus appears to be mainly mediated by an interaction with the pore-forming α-subunit of the channel, rather than with the regulatory β-subunit (Nimigean and Magleby, 1999). This study showed a lack of effect of this drug on single-channel conductance, suggesting that it does not act by reaching the inner pore or cavity of the channel. With the aid of the LALIGN program (http://fasta.bioch.virginia.edu/fasta/lalign.htm), we have further evaluated the similarity of amino-acid sequence between the α-subunits of BKCa channel and Nav1.5. Notably, the major portion in BKCa-channel α-subunit (human; Q12791), to which the sequence of Nav1.5 α-subunit (26.8% identity) shares the similarity, was found to be located at 260–330 (FFTVPPVFVSVYLNRSWLGLRFLRALRLIQFSEILQFL- NILKTSNSIKLVNLLSIFISTW LTAAGFIHLVENSG-DPWENFQ), which is located in the S5 segment of the BKCa channel. This comparison raises the possibility that the riluzole molecule binds to similar docking region(s) to activate the activity of BKCa channels as well as to block INa. Nevertheless, riluzole-induced blockade of INa, in combination with its concomitant activation of BKCa channels, can be implicated in regulating functional activities of skeletal muscle fibers in vivo.

<a id='631909db-c9ca-4212-a0d9-1d35ff3f9cb3'></a>

Previous studies have demonstrated that riluzole could disrupt glutamatergic neurotransmission and inhibit the release of glutamate to synaptic cleft (Martin et al., 1993; Doble, 1996; De Sarro et al., 2000; Miller et al., 2003). However, little or no evidence has been demonstrated to exhibit glutamate receptors in cultured skeletal muscle cells. Furthermore, glutamate (1 mM) did not affect both inhibition of _I_Na and stimulation of BKCa channels caused by riluzole (data not shown). The effects of this drug on ion currents presented here are apparently not associated with a mechanism linked to blockade of glutamate receptor, inhibition of glutamate uptake, or both.

<a id='bc3098e3-6dec-4dfc-ac40-06de74cda22a'></a>

Human skeletal muscle cells were used in the present study. One would expect that Na_v1.4 is more abundant than Na_v1.5. It is clear that the α-subunit of Na_v1.5 is functionally expressed in our experimental conditions. In our study, riluzole at a concentration of 1 µM could block 40% of I_Na. It is thus likely that this compound acts on tetrodotoxin-sensitive I_Na rather than tetrodotoxin-resistant I_Na. It thus remains to be further determined whether riluzole also affects the functional activity of Na_v1.4 in skeletal muscle cells.

<a id='c49aec17-02ae-4dda-ad2b-f7c35793a82e'></a>

With the aid of a theoretical model presented here, we also examined the effect of riluzole on simulated action potentials in skeletal muscle cells. Based on this model, we are able to show clearly that the agents known to decrease the conductance of INa and increase the conductance of IK(Ca) (i.e., riluzole) can effectively reduce the amplitude of action potential and shorten the duration of action potentials in simulated cells. The simulation results also prompted us to propose that, in combination with blockade of INa, riluzole-induced increase in BKca-channel activity may synergistically contribute to its effect on the activity of skeletal muscle fibers in vivo. Although it incorporates many simplifying assumptions, the quantitative model presented herein is able to complement the experimental observations by

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='7e3e0edd-8189-4691-8fd6-4770a680bca0'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='5ac524b0-6d78-4d66-a3d2-aa8b4789c076'></a>

19

<a id='ed26400b-0c7b-4b69-b930-48755e6ed0ab'></a>

providing insight into the two types of ion channels which can impinge upon the behavior of the whole muscle fiber.

<a id='ec9eee75-ac50-4d8b-927b-f44429d20330'></a>

In summary, this study provides evidence that in dHSkMCs,
BKca and Na+ channels, which are functionally expressed in
dHSkMCs, are sensitive to stimulation and block by riluzole,
respectively. The simulation model also predicts that the activity
of these channels can be modified by riluzole in these cells. The
experimental and simulation results made in this study can be
expected to modify skeletal muscle action potential in vivo. As
a result, the exposure to riluzole may directly prevent impulse
propagation in skeletal muscle cells per se, although it affects
electrical behaviors in motor neurons (Rothstein and Kuncl,
1995; Peluffo et al., 1997; Siniscalchi et al., 1997; Miller et al.,
2003). This and other structurally similar drugs may well be
useful for other types of skeletal muscle disorders as reported
previously in mice (Kennel et al., 2000; Wu et al., 2006).
dHSkMCs used herein may also be a good model for studies of
ion channels in human skeletal muscle cells.

<a id='745ff6eb-3bbf-4ab5-bb51-97eb47c40341'></a>

## Acknowledgements
The work was partly supported by grants from the National Science Council (NSC-93-2320B-006-055 and NSC-94-2320B-006-019), and the Program for Promoting Academic Excellence and Developing World Class Research Centers, Ministry of Education, Taiwan.

<a id='31b9b619-1ed9-485b-b6b1-79717eb54293'></a>

# References

Adrian, R.H., Chandler, W.K., Hodgkin, A.L., 1970. Voltage clamp experiments
in striated muscle fibres. Journal of Physiology (London) 208 (3), 607-644.
Bensimon, G., Lacomblez, L., Meininger, V., 1994. A controlled trial of riluzole
in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS/Riluzole Study Group. New England
Journal of Medicine 330 (9), 585-591.
Bingham, J.P., Bian, S., Tan, Z.Y., Takacs, Z., Moczydlowski, E., 2006.
Synthesis of a biotin derivative of iberiotoxin: binding interactions with
streptavidin and the BK Ca2+-activated K+ channel expressed in a human
cell line. Bioconjugate Chemistry 17 (3), 689-699.
Boixel, C., Gavillet, B., Rougier, J.S., Abriel, H., 2006. Aldosterone increases
voltage-gated sodium current in ventricular myocytes. American Journal of
Physiology. Heart and Circulatory Physiology 290 (6), H2257-H2266.
Cheung, Y.K., Gordon, P.H., Levin, B., 2006. Selective promising ALS
therapies in clinical trials. Neurology 67 (10), 1748-1751.
Couratier, P., Sindou, P., Esclaire, F., Louvel, E., Hugon, J., 1994. Neuroprotective
effects of riluzole in ALS CSF toxicity. NeuroReport 5 (8), 1012-1014.
De Sarro, G., Siniscalchi, A., Ferreri, G., Gallelli, L., De Sarro, A., 2000. NMDA
and AMPA/kainate receptors are involved in the anticonvulsant activity of
riluzole in DBA/2 mice. European Journal of Pharmacology 408 (1), 25-34.
Doble, A., 1996. The pharmacology and mechanism of action of riluzole.
Neurology 47 (6 Suppl 4), S233-S241.
Donahue, L.M., Coates, P.W., Lee, V.H., Ippensen, D.C., Arze, S.E., Poduslo, S.E.,
2000. The cardiac sodium channel mRNA is expressed in the developing and
adult rat and human brain. Brain Research 887 (2), 335-343.
Grunnet, M., Jespersen, T., Angelo, K., Frokjaer-Jensen, C., Klaerke, D.A.,
Olesen, S.P., Jensen, B.S., 2001. Pharmacological modulation of SK3
channels. Neuropharmacology 40 (7), 879-887.
Gurney, M.E., Fleck, T.J., Himes, C.S., Hall, E.D., 1998. Riluzole preserves
motor function in a transgenic model of familial amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Neurology 50 (1), 62-66.
Hebert, T., Drapeau, P., Pradier, L., Dunn, R.J., 1994. Block of the rat brain IIA
sodium channel alpha subunit by the neuroprotective drug riluzole.
Molecular Pharmacology 45 (5), 1055-1060.

<a id='1fc5de06-68b5-4636-a3fb-59905d66a909'></a>

Kallen, R.G., Sheng, Z.H., Yang, J., Chen, L.Q., Rogart, R.B., Barchi, R.L.,
1990. Primary structure and expression of a sodium channel characteristic of
denervated and immature rat skeletal muscle. Neuron 4 (2), 233-242.
Keener, J.P., Keizer, J.E., 2002. Fast and slow time scales (Chapter 4). In: Fall,
C.P., Marland, E.S., Wagner, J.M., Tyson, J.J. (Eds.), Computational Cell
Biology. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. 77-100.
Kennel, P., Revah, F., Bohme, G.A., Bejuit, R., Gallix, P., Stutzmann, J.-M.,
Imperator, A., Pratt, J., 2000. Riluzole prolongs survival and delays muscle
strength deterioration in mice with progressive motor neuropathy (pmn).
Journal of Neurological Science 180 (1-2), 55-61.
Kobayashi, H., Shiraishi, S., Yanagita, T., Yokoo, H., Yamamoto, R., Minami, S.,
Saitoh, T., Wada, A., 2002. Regulation of voltage-dependent sodium channel
expression in adrenal chromaffin cells: involvement of multiple calcium signaling
pathways. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 971, 127-134.
Mantz, J., Laudenbach, V., Lecharny, J.B., Henzel, D., Desmonts, J.M., 1994.
Riluzole, a novel antiglutamate, blocks GABA uptake by striatal synapto-
somes. European Journal of Pharmacology 257 (1-2), R7-R8.
Martin, D., Thompson, M.A., Nadler, J.V., 1993. The neuroprotective agent
riluzole inhibits release of glutamate and aspartate from slices of hippocampal
area CA1. European Journal of Pharmacology 250 (3), 473-476.
Ménard, C., Pupier, S., Mornet, D., Kitzmann, M., Nargeot, J., Lory, P., 1999.
Modulation of L-type calcium channel expression during retinoic acid-
induced differentiation of H9C2 cardiac cells. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 274 (41), 29063-29070.
Miller, R.G., Mitchell, J.D., Lyon, M., Moore, D.H., 2003. Riluzole for
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/motor neuron disease (MND). Amyo-
trophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Motor Neuron Disorders 4 (3), 191-206.
Moczydlowski, E., Latorre, R., 1983. Gating kinetics of Ca2+-activated K+
channels from rat muscle incorporated into planar lipid bilayers. Evidence
for two voltage-dependent Ca2+ binding reactions. Journal of General
Physiology 82 (4), 511-542.
Mohammadi, B., Lang, N., Dengler, R., Bufler, J., 2002. Interaction of high-
concentrations of riluzole with recombinant skeletal muscle sodium channels
and adult-type nicotinic receptor channels. Muscle and Nerve 26 (4), 539-545.
Nimigean, C.M., Magleby, K.L., 1999. The β subunit increases the Ca2+ sensitivity
of large conductance Ca2+-activated potassium channels by retaining the gating
in the bursting states. Journal of General Physiology 113 (3), 425-440.
Peluffo, H., Estevez, A., Barbeito, L., Stutzmann, J.M., 1997. Riluzole promotes
survival of rat motoneurons in vitro by stimulating trophic activity produced
by spinal astrocyte monolayers. Neuroscience Letters 228 (3), 207-211.
Rothstein, J.D., Kuncl, R.W., 1995. Neuroprotective strategies in a model of
chronic glutamate-mediated motor neuron toxicity. Journal of Neurochem-
istry 65 (2), 643-651.
Salkoff, L., Butler, A., Ferreira, G., Santi, C., Wei, A., 2006. High-conductance
potassium channels of the SLO family. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience 7 (12),
921-931.
Shang, L.L., Dudley Jr., S.C., 2005. Tandem promoters and developmentally
regulated 5'-and 3'-mRNA untranslated regions of the mouse Scn5a cardiac
sodium channel. Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 (2), 933-940.
Siniscalchi, A., Bonci, A., Mercuri, N.B., Bernardi, G., 1997. Effects of riluzole
on rat cortical neurones: an in vitro electrophysiological study. British
Journal of Pharmacology 120 (2), 225-230.
Song, J.H., Huang, C.S., Nagata, K., Yeh, J.Z., Narahashi, T., 1997. Differential
action of riluzole on tetrodotoxin-sensitive and tetrodotoxin-resistant
sodium channels. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
282 (2), 707-714.
Taniguchi, T., Endo, H., Chikatsu, N., Uchimaru, K., Asano, S., Fujita, T.,
Nakahata, T., Motokura, T., 1999. Expression of p21(Cip1/Wafl/Sdil) and
p27(Kip1) cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors during human hematopoiesis.
Blood 93 (12), 4167-4178.
Tricarico, D., Mele, A., Conte Camerino, D., 2005. Phenotype-dependent
functional and pharmacological properties of BK channels in skeletal
muscle: effects of microgravity. Neurobiology of Disease 20 (2), 296-302.
Wahl, F., Renou, E., Mary, V., Stutzmann, J.M., 1997. Riluzole reduces brain
lesions and improves neurological function in rats after a traumatic brain
injury. Brain Research 756 (1-2), 247-255.
Wang, Q., Li, Z., Shen, J., Keating, M.T., 1996. Genomic organization of the human
SCN5A gene encoding the cardiac sodium channel. Genomics 34 (1), 9-16.

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='e440a49b-af1e-401f-aade-1e7f0a8fbc1f'></a>

20

<a id='c8735ab8-4176-4ef9-b20c-8cb327805850'></a>

Y.-J. Wang et al. / Life Sciences 82 (2008) 11–20

<a id='a193740e-2366-4889-8848-a2c12118646e'></a>

Wang, W., Watanabe, M., Nakamura, T., Kudo, Y., Ochi, R., 1999. Properties and expression of Ca⁲ⁱ-activated Kⁱ channels in H9c2 cells derived from rat ventricle. American Journal of Physiology 276 (5 Pt 2), H1559–H1566.
Wang, Y.J., Liu, Y.C., Chang, H.D., Wu, S.N., 2006. Diosgenin, a plant-derived sapogenin, stimulates Ca⁲ⁱ-activated Kⁱ current in human cortical HCN-1A neuronal cells. Planta Medica 72 (5), 430–436.
Wu, S.N., Li, H.F., 1999. Characterization of riluzole-induced stimulation of large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channels in rat pituitary GH₃ cells. Journal of Investigative Medicine 47 (9), 484–495.
Wu, S.N., Wu, A.Z., Lin, M.W., 2006. Pharmacological roles of the large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channel. Current Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 6 (10), 1025–1030.

<a id='46c7559f-1b84-44e2-b380-f0b27d4e7e2b'></a>

Wu, S.N., Wang, Y.J., Lin, M.W., 2007. Potent stimulation of large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channels by rottlerin, an inhibitor of protein kinase C-δ, in pituitary tumor (GH3) cells and in cortical neuronal (HCN-1A) cells. Journal of Cellular Physiology 210 (3), 655–666.

<a id='1f028ce0-82f3-4cdb-81ce-f3160ddabf67'></a>

Yokoo, H., Shiraishi, S., Kobayashi, H., Yanagita, T., Yamamoto, R., Wada, A., 1998. Selective inhibition by riluzole of voltage-dependent sodium channels and catecholamine secretion in adrenal chromaffin cells. Naunyn-Schmie-deberg's Archives of Pharmacology 357 (5), 526-531.

<a id='92b9af1c-8efc-4458-a235-42884096293d'></a>

Zona, C., Siniscalchi, A., Mercuri, N.B., Bernardi, G., 1998. Riluzole interacts with voltage-activated sodium and potassium currents in cultured rat cortical neurons. Neuroscience 85 (3), 931–938.