<a id='663d2ca7-86d5-4349-9794-4a4f4476d31d'></a>

<::logo: Elsevier
NON SOLLUS
An intricate black and white illustration of a tree with two figures, possibly a lion and another animal, and a banner with text, all above the company name.::>

<a id='4b881b74-c30d-488d-8dc3-e34df6631b39'></a>

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
SCIENCE @ DIRECT"

<a id='7774d872-79c8-4b6d-b473-5b9fb45b9939'></a>

Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33–43

<a id='033b5ad6-868e-4161-9d63-1ec0464ace74'></a>

Journal of
Theoretical
Biology

www.elsevier.com/locate/jtbi

<a id='b7c86509-a89e-4694-a253-98e84675d67b'></a>

A mathematical model of the methionine cycle
Michael C. Reedª*, H. Frederik Nijhoutᵇ, Rachel Sparksᶜ, Cornelia M. Ulrichᶜ

<a id='ef8c2b08-8d35-4898-b964-ed522af9cea2'></a>

a Department of Mathematics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
b Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
c Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA
Received 7 March 2003; received in revised form 1 August 2003; accepted 4 August 2003

<a id='288fc058-8393-4f8e-b04d-e054b04bb1db'></a>

## Abstract

Building on the work of Martinov et al. (2000), a mathematical model is developed for the methionine cycle. A large amount of information is available about the enzymes that catalyse individual reaction steps in the cycle, from methionine to S-adenosylmethionine to S-adenosylhomocysteine to homocysteine, and the removal of mass from the cycle by the conversion of homocysteine to cystathionine. Nevertheless, the behavior of the cycle is very complicated since many substrates alter the activities of the enzymes in the reactions that produce them, and some can also alter the activities of other enzymes in the cycle. The model consists of four differential equations, based on known reaction kinetics, that can be solved to give the time course of the concentrations of the four main substrates in the cycle under various circumstances. We show that the behavior of the model in response to genetic abnormalities and dietary deficiencies is similar to the changes seen in a wide variety of experimental studies. We conduct computational "experiments" that give understanding of the regulatory behavior of the methionine cycle under normal conditions and the behavior in the presence of genetic variation and dietary deficiencies.
© 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

<a id='6fb77643-6f72-4188-8908-b7dc8e8aec21'></a>

Keywords: Folate metabolism; Genetic deficiency; Homocysteine; Mathematical model; Methionine; Methionine synthase; Methylation; Vitamin B

<a id='9cbec955-b10f-4627-8a59-9538a772bb8a'></a>

## 1. Introduction

The methionine cycle has three important functions in cellular metabolism. First, it regulates the balance between methionine and cysteine for protein synthesis; second, it provides the substrate for polyamine synthesis, and third, it provides the mechanism by which methyl groups are transferred from 5-methyltetrahydrofolate to a broad variety of substrates and constitutes the primary mechanism for transmethylation reactions in mammals (Finkelstein, 1990). Normal functioning of the methionine cycle is essential for growth and development, and abnormalities in methionine metabolism and transmethylation efficiency are associated with cardiovascular disease (Refsum et al., 1998), liver disease (Finkelstein, 2003), neural tube defects (Eskes, 2001), and cancer (Duthie, 1999; Potter, 1999).

<a id='af1d41e0-4e9d-4e3c-baea-552942f4bb97'></a>

--- 
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-919-660-2821; fax: +1-919-606-2808.
E-mail addresses: reed@math.duke.edu (M.C. Reed), hfn@acpub.duke.edu (H.F. Nijhout), rsparks@fhcrc.org (R. Sparks), nulrich@fhcrc.org (C.M. Ulrich).

<a id='4e7b8756-93d5-4065-87d2-fec6436ab507'></a>

0022-5193/$- see front matter  2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2003.08.001

<a id='09921fd4-a29f-4e61-87a1-c380430992a0'></a>

Because of its central role in cell metabolism, the operation of the methionine cycle (Fig. 1) has been the subject of numerous experimental studies (Finkelstein, 1990). This work has revealed complex responses to experimental variation in its various components. Some of this complexity arises from the fact that enzymes of the methionine cycle are activated and inhibited by several of the intermediates of the cycle. A significant part of the complexity arises from nonlinearities in the interactions among the components of the cycle that make the response to perturbation context-dependent, and therefore non-intuitive and unpredictable. Much of what is known about the properties and behavior of the pathway comes from a broad body of empirical experience, both in vivo and in vitro (e.g. Banerjee et al., 1990; Finkelstein, 1990, 2001; Finkelstein et al., 1982; Finkelstein and Martin, 1984, 1986; Hoffman et al., 1980).

<a id='82118f9f-cdd5-42c8-88ad-9d2e22229ede'></a>

A mathematical model of a portion of the methionine
cycle has been developed by Martinov et al. (2000), who
used it to explain the mechanism behind the sudden
switch from a low to a high S-adenosylmethionine
(AdoMet) concentration with a gradual increase in the

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='e2ab33b0-0bb4-4913-96a2-b45577088567'></a>

34

<a id='13a703b3-6679-4746-83cb-14afa8af9f51'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33-43

<a id='a0500668-540e-4836-8ef7-7a40902e3c35'></a>

<::flowchart: Components of methionine metabolism:Metin (input) -> [methionine].
ATP -> [methionine] (via MAT-I, MAT-III) -> [AdoMet].
[AdoMet] -> (via GNMT) -> glycine.
[AdoMet] -> (via SM) -> S-CH3 and S (substrates for methylation).
[AdoMet] -> [AdoHcy].
[AdoHcy] -> (via AH) -> adenosine and H2O.
[AdoHcy] -> [homocysteine].
[homocysteine] -> (via BHMT) -> betaine and sarcosine -> [methionine].
[homocysteine] -> (via MS) -> 5mTHF -> [methionine].
[homocysteine] -> (via CBS) -> serine -> [cystathionine].

Fig. 1. Components of methionine metabolism modeled in this paper.
The main metabolites are shown in boxes and the enzymes in
ellipses. Abbreviations: 5mTHF = 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate;
AdoHcy = S-adenosylhomocysteine; AdoMet = S-adenosylmethio-
nine; AH = S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase; BHMT =
betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase; CBS = cystathionine β-
synthase; GNMT = glycine N-methyltransferase; MAT = methionine
adenosyl transferase; Metin = rate of metionine input; MS =
methionine synthase; S = substrates for methylation; SM = S-adeno-
sylmethionine-dependent methyltransferases.::>

<a id='26ee053f-3393-4c1c-8269-94ed3d114e63'></a>

concentration of methionine. The elevated level of AdoMet is associated with a higher rate of methionine metabolism and provides a mechanism for dealing with excess methionine. The analysis of Martinov et al. (2000) showed that the bistability of AdoMet concentration was a consequence of the kinetic properties of two isoenzymes of methionine adenosyl transferase (*MATI* and *MATIII*), and of the cooperative kinetics of glycine-*N*-methyltransferase. Martinov et al., however, treated the methionine concentration as a parameter and did not consider the reactions by which homocysteine, a key metabolite in the methionine cycle, is remethylated to form methionine. Thus, they could not study the dynamics of the methionine concentration nor the role that *AdoMet* plays in regulating the alternative fates of homocysteine. In short, they could not study the dynamic properties of the methionine cycle as a whole.

<a id='2d79816e-2efb-45dc-88b7-b14d67d1b4ea'></a>

In the present paper we extend the mathematical
model of Martinov et al. (2000) by closing the cycle and
taking into account the influence of S-adenosylmethio-
nine and S-adenosylhomocysteine on the fates of
homocysteine. Homocysteine can enter the transsulfura-
tion pathway and be converted to cystathionine, or it
can be methylated by either 5-methyltetrahydrofolate or
betaine to form methionine, which closes the cycle, as
illustrated in Fig. 1. In our model we follow the time
course of the four main metabolites, methionine (Met),

<a id='9d560133-2ea3-4e56-9a2e-055e288e630f'></a>

<::The methionine cycle: flowchart
Metin flows into methionine.
methionine is converted to AdoMet via V_MAT-I and V_MAT-III.
AdoMet is converted to AdoHcy via V_METH, releasing CH3. AdoMet is also converted to AdoHcy via V_GNMT.
AdoHcy is converted to homocysteine via V_AH.
homocysteine is converted to methionine via V_MS (with input from 5mTHF) and V_BHMT.
homocysteine is also converted to cystathionine via V_CBS.

Regulatory influences (dotted lines):
AdoMet activates V_CBS.
AdoMet inhibits V_BHMT.
AdoMet inhibits V_MS.
AdoMet activates V_GNMT.
AdoHcy inhibits V_MAT-I.
AdoHcy inhibits V_MAT-III.
AdoHcy activates V_BHMT.
AdoHcy inhibits V_CBS.

Fig. 2. The methionine cycle. For each arrow, the corresponding subscripted V denotes the current rate of the reaction. The dotted lines indicate the influence of *AdoMet* and *AdoHcy* on enzymes in the pathway. Arrows indicate activation; bars indicate inhibition.::>

<a id='b7841467-0e54-4576-bae0-514b7fc5865c'></a>

S-adenosylmethionine (_AdoMet_), S-adenosylhomocys-
teine (_AdoHcy_), and homocysteine (_Hcy_). We are
interested not only in the steady-state behavior but in
the responses of the system away from equilibrium. We
want to use the model to understand effects of temporal
variation in methionine and folate input on the
metabolite concentrations. In addition, we want to
understand the mechanisms by which dietary deficien-
cies (protein, vitamins B6, B12) and genetic abnormalities
cause changes in metabolite concentrations and affect
the operation of the cycle as a whole.

<a id='370ae347-5380-4aa7-9849-6dd221f6c53c'></a>

The behavior of the methionine cycle is surprisingly complex. Several steps in the pathway are catalysed by multiple enzymes, many of which have rather complicated kinetics. Furthermore, two of the metabolites, *AdoMet* and *AdoHcy*, not only influence the enzymes that catalyse their own synthesis, but also activate and inhibit several other enzymes in the pathway (see Fig. 2). As we will see, these interactions are critical for the remarkable regulatory properties of the network.

<a id='f4d8777f-f843-45c3-8e0b-977a598ce689'></a>

## 2. Description of the mathematical model

We wish to follow the time course (away from equilibrium) as well as the steady states of the variables: methionine (Met); S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet); S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy); homocysteine ([Hcy]) (Table 1).

<a id='ef383cd6-94a3-409f-90e1-053860fe74a3'></a>

We regard the rate of methionine input (_Metin_) and the concentration of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (_5mTHF_) as given functions of time and wish to compute the variables _Met_, _AdoMet_, _AdoHcy_, and _Hcy_ as functions of time. These variables satisfy the four differential

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='762d38d6-396a-41ab-bede-6b4b377f96ba'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33–43

<a id='28d66aff-66d7-496e-a9d6-7ec3f3e81496'></a>

35

<a id='c89d2a99-c79a-4739-82e3-4c7a28bebf05'></a>

Table 1
The time-dependent variables
<table id="2-1">
<tr><td id="2-2">Variable</td><td id="2-3">Units</td><td id="2-4">Description</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-5">[Met]</td><td id="2-6">μM</td><td id="2-7">Methionine concentration</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-8">[AdoMet]</td><td id="2-9">μM</td><td id="2-a">S-adenosylmethionine concentration</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-b">[AdoHcy]</td><td id="2-c">μM</td><td id="2-d">S-adenosylhomocysteine concentration</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-e">[Hcy]</td><td id="2-f">μM</td><td id="2-g">Homocysteine concentration</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='f85ba48c-4c64-43ba-bdd5-8434bd412085'></a>

equations:
d[Met]/dt = V_MS + V_BHMT + Metin - V_MATI - V_MATIII,
(1)

<a id='5b753e1f-505d-437b-ba8b-9c14a4740a52'></a>

$$\frac{\text{d[AdoMet]}}{\text{dt}} = V_{\text{MATI}} + V_{\text{MATIII}} - V_{\text{METH}} - V_{\text{GNMT}}, \quad (2)$$

$$\frac{\text{d[AdoHcy]}}{\text{dt}} = V_{\text{METH}} + V_{\text{GNMT}} - V_{\text{AH}}, \quad (3)$$

$$\frac{\text{d[Hcy]}}{\text{dt}} = V_{\text{AH}} - V_{\text{CBS}} - V_{\text{MS}} - V_{\text{BHMT}}, \quad (4)$$

<a id='97737ce4-6022-4fdc-94ae-05baabbfbfa1'></a>

where the terms on the right-hand sides are the rates of the reactions shown in Fig. 2. These rates depend, of course, on the current values of one or more of the variables. It is here that the fundamental kinetic information comes into play. We begin by restating the rates used by Martinov et al. (2000), for the creation of *AdoMet* from *Met* and then work our way around the diagram in Fig. 2 in clockwise fashion.

<a id='6562c68b-2471-489f-8cfd-b2b16ef66525'></a>

In the liver there are two isoforms of methionine
adenosyl transferase, _MATI_ and _MATIII_. The first,
_MATI_, is inhibited by its product, _AdoMet_, whereas, the
second, _MATIII_, is activated by _AdoMet_. The various
ways in which the metabolites _AdoMet_ and _AdoHcy_
interact with various enzymes in the methionine cycle
are illustrated in Fig. 2. We adopt the kinetic schemes
and rate constants for the _MATI_ and _MATIII_ reactions
used by Martinov et al. (2000):

<a id='60e574ee-810e-4db4-b67a-2b72f175b278'></a>

$$V_{MATI} = \frac{V_{max}^{MATI}}{1 + \frac{K_m^{MATI}}{[Met]} \left(1 + \frac{[AdoMet]}{K_i^{MATI}}\right)}, (5)$$

<a id='55119f19-689b-4175-b270-98bf3a742ace'></a>

$$V_{MATIII} = \frac{V_{max}^{MATIII}}{1 + \frac{K_{m1}^{MATIII} K_{m2}^{MATIII}}{[Met]^2 + [Met]K_{m2}^{MATIII}}}, \quad (6)$$

<a id='348f010a-5dfa-44b8-bf36-fd86672b15d2'></a>

where

K_m1^MATIII = 20000 / (1 + 5.7 * ([Ado Met] / ([Ado Met] + 600))^2) (7)

<a id='f9a12612-2b5d-48e8-a014-e495ab538bed'></a>

The next step in the pathway is the demethylation of
*AdoMet* to *AdoHcy*. There are two separate reactions
for this demethylation. The first is catalysed by glycine
*N*-methyltrasferase (*GNMT*), which methylates glycine

<a id='f2a37c38-5b2e-4349-a1fb-cd7ed2cbbaaf'></a>

to become sarcosine. Following Martinov et al. (2000),

$V_{GNMT} = \frac{V_{max}^{GNMT}}{1 + \left(\frac{K_m^{GNMT}}{[AdoMet]}\right)^{2.3}} \frac{1}{1 + \frac{[AdoHcy]}{K_i^{GNMT}}}$ (8)

<a id='7276a5d9-ece3-4cf0-b7c7-cc983ec40fcf'></a>

Note that the rate of this reaction is sigmoidally dependent on _AdoMet_ and is inhibited by the product, _AdoHcy_. The second lumps together several methyl transfer reactions that use _Adomet_ as a methyl donor. The overall rate of these methyl transfer reactions is given by

<a id='efca551a-b8bc-4582-a37c-f94799dd09fe'></a>

V_METH = V_max^METH / (1 + K_m1^METH / [AdoMet] + K_m2^METH / [A] + K_m2^METH / [A] * K_m1^METH / [AdoMet]) (9)

<a id='d8b8aeaa-0dc2-41cc-b504-95cabbd200c9'></a>

Table 2
Rate constants and references
<table id="2-h">
<tr><td id="2-i">Enzyme</td><td id="2-j">Parameter</td><td id="2-k">Units</td><td id="2-l">Value</td><td id="2-m">References</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-n">MATI</td><td id="2-o">VMATI max</td><td id="2-p">μΜ/h</td><td id="2-q">561</td><td id="2-r">(1),(2),(3)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-s"></td><td id="2-t">KMATI m</td><td id="2-u">μΜ</td><td id="2-v">41</td><td id="2-w">(1),(4)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-x"></td><td id="2-y">KMATI i</td><td id="2-z">μΜ</td><td id="2-A">50</td><td id="2-B">(1),(2),(4),(5)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-C">MATIII</td><td id="2-D">VMATIII max</td><td id="2-E">μΜ/h</td><td id="2-F">22,870</td><td id="2-G">(1),(2),(3)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-H"></td><td id="2-I">KMATIII m1</td><td id="2-J">μM</td><td id="2-K">†</td><td id="2-L">(1),(4)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-M"></td><td id="2-N">KMATIII m2</td><td id="2-O">μM</td><td id="2-P">21.1</td><td id="2-Q">(1),(4)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-R">GNMT</td><td id="2-S">VGNMT max</td><td id="2-T">μM/h</td><td id="2-U">10,600</td><td id="2-V">(1),(6),(7)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-W"></td><td id="2-X">KGNMT m</td><td id="2-Y">μM</td><td id="2-Z">4500</td><td id="2-10">(1),(6)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-11"></td><td id="2-12">KGNMT i</td><td id="2-13">μM</td><td id="2-14">20</td><td id="2-15">(1),(8)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-16">Methylation</td><td id="2-17">V&quot;METH&quot;_max</td><td id="2-18">μM/h</td><td id="2-19">4521</td><td id="2-1a">(1)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1b"></td><td id="2-1c">K&quot;METH&quot;_m1</td><td id="2-1d">μM</td><td id="2-1e">†</td><td id="2-1f">(1),(9),(10)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1g"></td><td id="2-1h">K&quot;METH&quot;_m2/[A]</td><td id="2-1i">—</td><td id="2-1j">10</td><td id="2-1k">*,(1),(9),(10)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1l">AH</td><td id="2-1m">V_AH</td><td id="2-1n">μM/h</td><td id="2-1o">†</td><td id="2-1p">*,(11)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1q"></td><td id="2-1r">α1</td><td id="2-1s">1/h</td><td id="2-1t">100</td><td id="2-1u"></td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1v"></td><td id="2-1w">α2</td><td id="2-1x">None</td><td id="2-1y">10</td><td id="2-1z">*</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1A">CBS</td><td id="2-1B">V CBS</td><td id="2-1C">μM/h</td><td id="2-1D">†</td><td id="2-1E">*, (12),(13),(14),(15),(16),(17)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1F"></td><td id="2-1G">β1</td><td id="2-1H">1/μM h</td><td id="2-1I">1.7</td><td id="2-1J">*</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1K"></td><td id="2-1L">β2</td><td id="2-1M">(h)-1</td><td id="2-1N">30</td><td id="2-1O">*</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1P">MS</td><td id="2-1Q">V MS max</td><td id="2-1R">μM/h</td><td id="2-1S">500</td><td id="2-1T">*, (18),(19)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1U"></td><td id="2-1V">KMS m,Hcv</td><td id="2-1W">μΜ</td><td id="2-1X">0.1</td><td id="2-1Y">(20)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-1Z"></td><td id="2-20">KMS m.5mTHF</td><td id="2-21">μΜ</td><td id="2-22">25</td><td id="2-23">(20)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-24"></td><td id="2-25">KMS d</td><td id="2-26">μΜ</td><td id="2-27">1</td><td id="2-28">(21)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-29">BHMT</td><td id="2-2a">VBHMT max</td><td id="2-2b">μΜ/h</td><td id="2-2c">2500</td><td id="2-2d">*, (12), (22)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-2e"></td><td id="2-2f">KBHMT m</td><td id="2-2g">μΜ</td><td id="2-2h">12</td><td id="2-2i">*, (23)</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='8b7794c1-e746-42a8-a41b-82e8aed3743c'></a>

* See text; † depends on variables; (1) Martinov et al. (2000); (2) Cabrero and Alemany (1988); (3) Hoffman (1983); (4) Sullivan and Hoffmann (1983); (5) Cabrero et al. (1987); (6) Ogawa and Fujioka (1982); (7) Yeo and Wagner (1992); (8) Kerr and Headly (1974); (9) Dueree et al. (1977); (10) Hoffman and Cornatzer (1978); (11) Hoffman et al. (1979); (12) Finkelstein and Martin (1984); (13) Finkelstein and Martin (1986); (14) Nakagawa and Kimura (1968); (15) Kashiwamata and Greenberg (1970); (16) Brown and Gordon (1971); (17) Borcsok and Abeles (1982); (18) Finkelstein and Martin (1986); ((19) Banerjee et al. (1997); (20) Banerjee et al. (1997); (21) Banerjee et al. (1990); (22) Finkelstein (1990); (23) Finkelstein et al. (1972).

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='2b0fad2a-bd98-4b5c-8ea0-ff33f90faee8'></a>

36

<a id='b29b1121-dc1d-451a-a629-e70153162b13'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33–43

<a id='f140ddec-6225-4a0f-9a52-447c000a28e6'></a>

where $A$ represents the substrates for methylation and
$K_{m1}^{METH} = 1.0\left(1 + \frac{[AdoHcy]}{4}\right)$. (10)

<a id='dd6b5285-e858-47a2-954d-91c3972b5d3f'></a>

We take K<sup>METH</sup><sub>m2</sub>/[A] = 10. All of the preceding kinetics and the values of constants (some of which are given in Table 2) are taken from Martinov et al. (2000), and we refer the reader to that paper for detailed justifications.

<a id='61943040-e2d0-4c25-903c-6079d3bf1eac'></a>

The next step in the pathway is the synthesis of _Hcy_
from _AdoHcy_, catalysed by adenosyl homocysteine
hydrolase (Prigge and Chiang, 2001). This reaction is
reversible and the enzyme has a much higher activity
than other enzymes in the pathway (Hoffman et al.,
1979; Martinov et al., 2000). Therefore [_Hcy_] will
rapidly adjust to variation in [_AdoHcy_] and flux through

<a id='aecaae9a-06c9-4475-8f46-710af4c923ef'></a>

physiological concentrations of [Hcy]:

VCBS = (β₁([Adomet] + [AdoHcy]) - β₂)[Hcy] (12)

where β₁ = 1.7 (μM)⁻¹(h)⁻¹ and β₂ = 30 (h)⁻¹

<a id='825c7024-f442-4e2d-823f-7b829b79efb8'></a>

The detailed kinetics of the reaction in which
methionine synthase transfers a methyl group from
_5mTHF_ to _Hcy_ to make _Met_ has been investigated in a
series of studies by Ruma Banerjee, Rowena Matthews,
and others (Banerjee et al., 1990, 1997). They conclude
that the reaction is most likely a sequential bi-bi
reaction. Since the reaction is extremely fast (ms) on
our time scale (h), and is not reversible, we take the
simple dependence of the initial rate of a sequential bi-bi
reaction on the substrates (Segel, 1975, p. 564) as our
formula for _V_MS:

<a id='9e7d2acc-f710-4222-8f2b-dc74240bc439'></a>

V_MS = V_MS^max [5mTHF][Hcy] / (K_d^MS K_m,Hcy^MS + K_m,Hcy^MS [5mTHF] + K_m,5mTHF^MS [Hcy] + [5mTHF][Hcy]) (13)

<a id='11b78405-6e67-4b18-9e4b-da84e92b888e'></a>

this portion of the pathway will rapidly adjust to
variation in flux in the overall pathway. We take the
following simple form for the kinetics of this reaction:

<a id='90b5637c-45db-4c41-8eff-7a48e173bb5a'></a>

V_AH = α_1([AdoHcy] - α_2[Hcy]). (11)

<a id='6157453d-a8eb-451e-8a71-0464867b78ae'></a>

Since typical concentrations measured for *AdoHcy* and *Hcy* have a ratio of about 10, we take α₂ = 10 (unitless) and choose α₁ = 100 h⁻¹ to ensure rapid adjustment.

<a id='5a5ae76c-a676-4763-8fde-0a1bda3366a7'></a>

Homocysteine has two fates. It can be converted to cystathionine via an irreversible transsulfuration reaction, V_CBS, catalysed by cystathionine \$\beta\$-synthase, which removes it from the methionine cycle, or it can acquire a methyl group, either from 5mTHF or from betaine, and be reconverted into Met by the reactions V_MS or V_BHMT utilizing the enzymes methionine synthase and betaine:-homocysteine methyltransferase, respectively.

<a id='a5f11fad-d24b-417c-8ff8-cc4e211f7647'></a>

The first of these reactions is catalysed by cystathio-
nine β-synthase. As shown in Fig. 2, this enzyme is
activated by *Adomet* and *AdoHcy* (Finkelstein and
Martin, 1984). They measured the rate V<sub>CBS</sub> as well as
the *Adomet* and *AdoHcy* concentrations in chow-fed rats
with diets containing different percentages of *Met*. A
simple regression on the data in Table 3 of Finkelstein
and Martin (1984) shows that a good approximation for
the dependence of V<sub>CBS</sub> on [*Adomet*] and [*AdoHcy*] is
V<sub>CBS</sub> = 1.7([*Adomet*] + [*AdoHcy*]) – 30. Of course, the
rate V<sub>CBS</sub> must also depend on [*Hcy*]. Since the K<sub>m</sub> for
*Hcy* is exceptionally high (in the range 5700 to 20,000:
Nakagawa and Kimura, 1968; Kashiwamata and
Greenberg, 1970; Brown and Gordon, 1971; Borcsok
and Abeles, 1982), the rate must be approximately linear
in [*Hcy*] at physiological concentrations, which are of
the order of magnitude of 1 µM. Therefore, we take the
following as a good approximation to the rate V<sub>CBS</sub> at

<a id='b7091620-6552-4f49-b352-c435611871c2'></a>

We take $K_{m,Hcy}^{MS} = 0.1 \mu M$ and $K_{m,5mTHF}^{MS} = 25 \mu M$ as found by Banerjee et al. (1997). A number of different values have been found for $V_{max}^{MS}$ ranging from $524 \mu M/h/kg$ (Finkelstein and Martin, 1986) to $1380 \mu M/h/kg$ (Banerjee et al., 1997). We take $V_{max}^{MS} = 500 \mu M/h/kg$. In Banerjee et al. (1990), $K_d^{MS}$ is taken to be $1 \mu M$ and they comment that the simulation results are quite insensitive to this choice (as one can see from Eq. (13) above since the first term in the denominator is quite small compared to the third term at physiological concentrations). Thus, we also choose $K_d^{MS} = 1 \mu M$.

<a id='8ee863eb-eb63-45ec-a4ce-3eb8fdebb5a4'></a>

The second reaction by which _Hcy_ is remethylated to become _Met_, with rate V_BHMT_, utilizes betaine as a substrate and is catalysed by betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase. In our model we assume that the concentration of betaine remains constant and is thus absorbed into V_BHMT_^(max). It is known (Finkelstein, 1990) that betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase is inhibited by [_Adomet_] and by [_AdoHcy_] (see Fig. 2). We take the following simple form for V_BHMT_:

<a id='d741cbc9-53b8-488c-8a57-19baaf25efd7'></a>

$V_{BHMT} = (0.7 - (0.025)([AdoMet] + [AdoHcy] - 150)) \times \frac{V_{BHMT}^{max} [Hcy]}{K_m^{BHMT} + [Hcy]}$ (14)

<a id='b2a18866-a540-4f62-bb07-3754d2d5a1ea'></a>

The value $K_m^{BHMT}$ = 12 µM for $Hcy$ was determined in Finkelstein et al. (1972), and we take $V_{BHMT}^{max}$ = 2500. If $Metin$ = 200, then under steady-state conditions (see Section 3) we have $[AdoMet] + [AdoHcy] \approx 150$ and $[Hcy]$ = 0.88 µM. Thus, the rate $V_{BHMT}$ will be $(0.7)(2500)\frac{0.88}{12+0.88} \approx 120$ µM/h, consistent with the range seen in Finkelstein and Martin (1984).

<a id='f4fa2c8a-7ea7-47f2-ad8f-e62eadec6428'></a>

We note that we have chosen simple factors, linear in
\[AdoMet\] + \[AdoHcy\], in Eqs. (12) and (14) to model the
activation of cystathionine β-synthase and the inhibition

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='513a8cbe-95b1-421a-9e0d-aa9c0dc61a34'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33-43

<a id='5239f5d8-69ca-422c-bedb-ea703e4b32db'></a>

37

<a id='34e52073-8db3-4171-a0d4-382754505c69'></a>

of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase by *AdoMet* and *AdoHcy*. The detailed kinetics of the activation of cystathionine synthase are not known, so, as noted above, the linear factor in *V<sub>CBS</sub>* is derived directly from the experimental data of Finkelstein and Martin (1984). Likewise the inhibition kinetics of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase are not well understood, so we also chose a simple linear factor that expresses this inhibition. We have found that the relative slopes of these two linear relationships play an important role in the regulatory behavior of the system. For instance, under steady-state conditions with *Metin* = 200 µM/h and [*Hcy*]≈1 µM, the slope of *V<sub>CBS</sub>* with respect to *AdoMet* is approximately 1.7. Suppose that *Metin* rises, driving up *AdoMet*, and *V<sub>BHMT</sub>* does not change. Then one unit increase in *Metin* will cause approximately 1.7 units of mass to be removed from the system by transsulfuration. In order to conserve mass, [*Hcy*] would have to decline, which is not consistent with physiological observation. If, however, the increase in *AdoMet* strongly inhibits *V<sub>BHMT</sub>*, then less *Hcy* will be recirculated, causing its concentration to rise, which drives the excess mass removal in the transsulfuration pathway. In Eq. (14), with [*Hcy*]≈1 µM, the slope of *V<sub>BHMT</sub>* with respect to *AdoMet* is approximately -5, and the resulting kinetics reproduce the observed transsulfuration fraction and correct pattern of changes in [*Hcy*]. We have found through simulation that these results are robust to at least 20% variation in parameter values. Of course, we cannot expect the real kinetics of the interactions of *AdoMet*, *AdoHcy*, and *Hcy* with cystathionine synthase and betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase to be linear over a very wide range of concentrations. Thus, we expect our model to accurately simulate the real biochemistry only over moderate physiological ranges of *AdoMet* and *AdoHcy*. As more detailed information on the kinetics becomes available, it can be readily incorporated into the model.

<a id='18d9663a-b608-4539-8192-771129e0a515'></a>

The differential equations (1)-(4) were solved using a simple forward Euler method with one exception. The reaction between *AdoHcy* and *Hcy* equilibrates extremely rapidly. Therefore, given the current concentrations of *Adomet* and *Adohcy*, the current concentration of *Hcy* was found by setting the right-hand side of Eq. (4) to zero and solving for [*Hcy*] by using Newton's method. All calculations were carried out by MatLab.

<a id='3be27eba-cc1c-4b38-8bda-ca5307f65874'></a>

## 3. Results
We begin (Part A) by analysing how the concentrations of the reactants (*Met*, *AdoMet*, *AdoHcy*, and *Hcy*) depend on rate of input of methionine (*Metin*). Next we examine the dynamic, non-steady-state, behavior of the system with special attention to regulatory control and its biological consequences (Part B). Finally, we

<a id='34ecde95-9b1f-4097-9a4b-d06411f08aa3'></a>

<::chart: A line graph titled "The effect of methionine input (Metin) on the steady-state levels of the four metabolites of the methionine cycle." The x-axis is labeled "Metin (μM/hr)" and ranges from 0 to 350. There are two y-axes. The left y-axis is labeled "Concentration (μM)" and ranges from 40 to 180. The right y-axis is also labeled "Concentration (μM)" and ranges from 0 to 16, with a break between 2 and 10. Four data series are plotted:
- AdoHcy: Represented by black filled circles connected by a dotted line, showing an increase from approximately 125 μM to 178 μM (left y-axis).
- AdoMet: Represented by white filled circles connected by a solid line, showing an increase from approximately 67 μM to 160 μM (left y-axis).
- homocysteine: Represented by white filled circles connected by a dotted line, showing an increase from approximately 0.8 μM to 1.3 μM (right y-axis).
- methionine: Represented by black filled circles connected by a solid line, showing a relatively constant level at approximately 0.5 μM (right y-axis).
Fig. 3. The effect of methionine input (Metin) on the steady-state levels of the four metabolites of the methionine cycle.::>

<a id='26a0a10b-3d19-4eaf-ac3e-9f8e02129799'></a>

compare the model predictions to a large variety of
experimental results (Part C).

<a id='c10c11c0-f226-4d38-af6f-492b9440ee4c'></a>

A. Steady-state behavior. At steady state, the rate of production of cystathionine, _VCBS_, must equal the rate of input of methionine, _Metin_. However, the steady-state values of the reactants in the system depend on _Metin_; see Fig. 3 where _Metin_ is varied from 50 to 300 μM/h. Perhaps the most striking result is the insensitivity of _Met_ to _Metin_. Despite a 6-fold variation in _Metin_, the _Met_ concentration varies between 49.7 and 53.6 μM. Evidently, this system is able to tightly control the concentration of _Met_ in the face of extreme variation of methionine input. One mechanism by which this control is achieved depends on the activities of _MATI_ and _MATIII_ that ensure rapid conversion of _Met_ to _Adomet_. As can be seen from Fig. 3, the steady-state concentration of _AdoMet_ increases dramatically as the rate _Metin_ increases.

<a id='2d666eff-23cf-4f1a-9523-070800b690a6'></a>

One would expect that the rate of methylation
($V_{METH}$) would depend strongly on the concentration
of AdoMet, the methyl donor. However, as can be seen
from Fig. 4, below, $V_{METH}$ is almost entirely indepen-
dent of Metin and [AdoMet]. The fundamental reason
for this stability is that, at physiological concentrations
of AdoMet, the $V_{METH}$ reaction is running at near
saturation. An important consequence of the stability of
$V_{METH}$ is the relative stability of its downstream
metabolites, AdoHcy and Hcy. The steady-state con-
centrations of AdoHcy and Hcy do increase with Metin
as observed by Finkelstein and Martin (1984), but the
increase is moderate compared to the increase in Metin.

<a id='732b5ae1-e139-4daa-85d5-c1c09c9c7b51'></a>

Neither the methionine input to mammalian hepato-
cyctes nor the portion that enters the methionine cycle
are well known quantitatively and both may vary in
time. One can deduce an estimate of *Metin* from the
following considerations. The flux through the methio-
nine pathway from *Met* to *AdoMet* to *AdoHcy* to *Hcy* is
in the range of 400 µM/h (see references in [Martinov
et al., 2000](Martinov et al., 2000)). About 50% of *Hey* is transsulfurated under

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='e839e15c-6750-4bfb-92c9-4af090a6e577'></a>

38

<a id='59023934-85bb-488d-9424-ed4d6d0be301'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33-43

<a id='823b0d7e-7fbe-468e-8939-9b5784a2ef3b'></a>

<::chart: Fig. 4. The effects of dynamic changes in Metin on the metabolites (Panel A) and the rates of methylation and the reactions that use homocysteine as a substrate (Panel B). Panel A shows four sub-plots over Time (hours) from 0 to 10. The top sub-plot has a Y-axis labeled Rate (µM/hr) from 100 to 350, showing a solid line for Metin. The second and third sub-plots share a Y-axis labeled Concentration (µM) from 60 to 180, showing a dotted line for AdoMet and a solid line for methionine. The fourth sub-plot has a Y-axis labeled Concentration (µM) from 0.6 to 1.4, showing a solid line for homocysteine. Panel B shows a single plot over Time (hours) from 0 to 10 with a Y-axis labeled Rate (µM/hr) from 0 to 500, displaying four data series: V_METH (solid line), V_CBS (dotted line), V_BHMT (solid line), and V_MS (dash-dot line).::>

<a id='ead3a235-8709-4b1e-8e7d-1f7d441c0f3e'></a>

normal conditions (Finkelstein and Martin, 1986;
Finkelstein, 1990), so about 200 µM/h leaves the
methione cycle. At steady state, the input of methionine
must match the output so the input is probably, on
average, about 200 µM/h.

<a id='78edb198-54c8-4f61-ac52-5dc867e1fad8'></a>

We therefore take *Metin* = 200 µM/h as our "normal" methionine input. At steady state, this yields the following concentrations of the metabolites: [*Met*] = 53.5 µM, [*AdoMet*] = 137.6 µM, [*AdoHcy*] = 13.2 µM, [*Hcy*] = 0.88 µM. These metabolite concentrations are in the normal physiological range (see references in *Martinov et al., 2000*). Unless otherwise specified, we take [*5mTHF*] = 5.2 µM, consistent with the data in *Cook (2001)*. At this steady state, *V*<sub>METH</sub> = 398.5 µM/h

<a id='8f5dfde9-95d4-4b90-aeeb-0d499212e326'></a>

and V_GNMT_ = 2.1 µM/h, so that at each step from Met to AdoMet to AdoHcy to Hcy the net flux is approximately 400 µM/h. Because at steady state the input into the pathway (Metin = 200 µM/h) must equal the output, the flux out of the pathway, V_CBS_, is also 200 µM/h at steady state. Thus, in this normal mode, 50% of the flux around the cycle is removed by transsulfuration to cystathionine. It may seem that the steady-state concentration of Hcy is low. However, we note that, in life, 90% of the Hcy may be bound to protein (Gregory et al., 1998), and in our model the concentration refers to the free metabolite.

<a id='9cc66003-de91-404b-8adf-3eb1a475cd03'></a>

B. Dynamics and control. As emphasized by Finkelstein, the methionine cycle exhibits remarkable regulative properties (Finkelstein and Martin, 1984, 1986; Finkelstein, 1990, 2001.) This can be observed if one examines the effect of temporal variation in Metin. Fig. 4 shows the effects of a sudden change of the methionine input from 200 to 300 μΜ/h for 3 h followed by a decrease to 100 μΜ/h for 3 h after which the input returns to 200 μΜ/h.

<a id='7fd2d3c7-24bd-434b-b44b-5aea753d4e6d'></a>

As shown in Fig. 4 (Part A), the *Met* concentration varies very little. Most of the fluctuation of *Metin* is absorbed as a fluctuation in [*AdoMet*]. Throughout, the methylation rate remains virtually unaltered. The major changes in the system are in the rates of transsulfuration of homocysteine, *V*<sub>CBS</sub>, and remethylation of homocysteine via the betaine reaction, *V*<sub>BHMT</sub>. This redistribution of homocysteine between competing pathways is due to complementary changes in the activities of betaine:homocysteine methyltrasferase and cystathionine β-synthase controlled by *AdoMet*. Between hours 2 and 5, as [*AdoMet*] rises, the activity of cystathionine β-synthase is increased and that of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase is decreased (see Fig. 4B). Then when *Metin* drops to 100 µM/h between hours 5 and 8, the activity of cystathionine β-synthase is decreased and that of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase is increased (Fig. 4B). The biological significance of this regulation is that the increase in transsulfuration between hours 2 and 5 is accomplished without a major increase in the concentration of homocysteine. In fact, as can be seen in Fig. 4, the steady-state level of *Hcy* increases only moderately as *Metin* rises from 200 to 300 µM/h. If the activity of cystathionine β-synthase were not sensitive to *Adomet*, the increased rate of transsulfuration and removal of excess methionine could only be accomplished by a dramatic rise in the concentration of homocysteine.

<a id='8a35d1ba-0f07-4f56-9b9b-ea0f07fedca0'></a>

The effect of temporal variation in folate availability is shown in Fig. 5. We varied the concentration of 5mTHF from 5.2 to 7.2 μΜ for 3 h followed by a decrease to 3.2 µM for 3 h after which the level returns to 5.2 µM. As one can see, [Met], [AdoMet], and the methylation rate, VMETH, change very little. Since

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='3a2a3f52-88db-42a1-85f7-aa643e12dcbb'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33-43

<a id='f6275def-445a-43ef-ada2-414b47458817'></a>

39

<a id='aecf40bb-4be9-4b07-9647-6a12c41131d2'></a>

<::Figure: Line graphs::>Fig. 5. The effects of dynamic changes in 5mTHF on the metabolites (Panel A) and the rates of methylation and the reactions that use homocysteine as a substrate (Panel B). Panel A shows four line graphs plotting Concentration (µM) versus Time (hours). The top graph shows 5mTHF concentration, which starts at approximately 5.25, increases to approximately 7.25 at 2 hours, decreases to approximately 3.25 at 5 hours, and returns to approximately 5.25 at 8 hours, remaining constant until 10 hours. The second graph from the top shows AdoMet concentration (dotted line), which fluctuates around 140 µM, with a slight increase after 2 hours and a decrease after 5 hours. The third graph shows methionine concentration (solid line), which remains relatively constant at approximately 54 µM, with minor fluctuations. The bottom graph shows homocysteine concentration (solid line), which starts at approximately 0.88 µM, decreases to approximately 0.82 µM at 2 hours, increases to approximately 0.98 µM at 5 hours, and then stabilizes around 0.92 µM at 8 hours. Panel B shows one line graph plotting Rate (µM/hr) versus Time (hours). V_METH (solid line) is constant at approximately 400 µM/hr. V_CBS (dotted line) fluctuates around 200 µM/hr, with a peak shortly after 5 hours. V_BHMT (dashed line) starts at approximately 120 µM/hr, decreases to approximately 90 µM/hr at 2 hours, increases to approximately 150 µM/hr at 5 hours, and then slightly decreases at 8 hours. V_MS (dash-dot line) starts at approximately 80 µM/hr, decreases to approximately 70 µM/hr at 2 hours, decreases further to approximately 60 µM/hr at 5 hours, and then increases to approximately 100 µM/hr at 8 hours.<::>

<a id='610cf60b-6f4c-4361-bf41-57efe2d82982'></a>

5mTHF is a substrate for the conversion of _Hcy_ to _Met_ via methionine synthase, the rate _V_MS follows the abrupt changes in 5mTHF. The sharp increase in _V_MS at _t_ = 2 h rapidly draws down [_Hcy_] which in turn decreases _V_CBS. The increase _V_MS also increases [_Met_] which drives up [_AdoMet_]. The increase in [_AdoMet_] increases the activity of cystathionine β-synthase. Consequently, as _V_CBS returns to its original steady-state level, [_Hcy_] can rise to its new (somewhat lower) steady-state by _t_ = 3 h. The moderate drop in [_Hcy_], combined with the inhibition of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase by the increase in [_AdoMet_] reduces _V_BHMT. When 5mTHF drops sharply to 3.2 µM at _t_ = 5 h, [_Hcy_] rises sharply instigating a similar sequence of

<a id='4ee5908d-06f2-40f2-97a8-d06b0ab6b174'></a>

events to those just described, except that all concentra-
tions change in the opposite direction. Finkelstein and
Martin (1984) describe experimental results in which
removal of 5mTHF resulted in an increase in betaine-
homocysteine methyltrasferase activity, and an "unex-
plained reduction in cystathionine synthase" activity. As
can be seen from Fig. 5, the reduction in [5mTHF]
results in a moderate increase in [Hcy] and a reduction in
[AdoMet]. The rate VCBs quickly returns to 200 μM/h.
This is due to a decrease in the activity of cystathionine
β-synthase (as seen by Finkelstein and Martin, 1984)
caused by the drop in [AdoMet]. The drop in activity is
balanced by the increase in [Hcy].

<a id='332cef97-8e41-41e6-9d06-7df49ae4949d'></a>

The main effect of the regulation of the activities of cystathionine synthase and betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase by _Adomet_ is that, under variation in _5mTHF_, the new equilibrium can be achieved with only moderate changes in [_Hcy_]. Throughout all these changes in metabolite concentrations and reaction velocities, the methylation rate, V_METH_, remains in the range 397.8-399.1 \u00b5M/h.

<a id='459659b8-ab2c-43c4-943a-5942861d3572'></a>

C. Comparison of model performance with experimen-tal results.
Transulfuration fraction. Finkelstein and Martin (1984) demonstrated in rat-liver homogenates that the fraction of Hcy that is utilized for cystathionine synthesis is a function of the concentration of AdoMet. Fig. 6 shows that in our model, at steady-state, the fraction of Hcy that is transsulfurated to cystathionine varies from 13% to 75% as [AdoMet] varies from 66 to 159 µM. This explains the observation of Finkelstein and Martin (1986) that an increase in dietary methionine causes an increase in cystathionine synthesis. The range of the fraction is also similar to that seen by Finkelstein and Martin (1984). An increase in Metin causes an increase in the steady-state value of [Adomet] (see Fig. 3). As we saw above, an increase in [Adomet] inhibits betaine:homocysteine S-methyltransferase (lowers

<a id='ac3710a9-9f8b-46f2-b898-c86a17b11948'></a>

<::line chart::>The chart plots 'Fraction transsulfurated' on the Y-axis against '[AdoMet] µM' on the X-axis. The Y-axis ranges from 0.0 to 0.8 in 0.1 increments. The X-axis ranges from 0 to 350 in 50 increments. Data points are connected by a line:
- (50, 0.13)
- (100, 0.25)
- (150, 0.38)
- (200, 0.50)
- (250, 0.62)
- (300, 0.75)
Fig. 6. The relationship between [AdoMet] and the fraction of homocysteine transsulfurated.<::>

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='83778f8b-a1ef-49a2-9023-8cb1557124c3'></a>

40

<a id='3e0e19da-9a87-43b8-b6c6-d99eeffaa3a1'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33-43

<a id='0e832c20-ca17-40bb-9145-4c3a4bca66f0'></a>

<::line chart: The chart shows the effect of [5mTHF] on steady-state [Hcy] and VBHMT. The x-axis is labeled "[5mTHF] µM" and ranges from 0 to 6. The left y-axis is labeled "V_BHMT (µM/hr)" and ranges from 100 to 200. The right y-axis is labeled "[homocysteine] µM" and ranges from 0.80 to 1.00. There are two data series: a solid line with filled circles representing "V_BHMT", which decreases from approximately 195 at [5mTHF]=0 to 117 at [5mTHF]=5.2. The second series is a dotted line with open circles representing "homocysteine", which decreases from approximately 0.98 at [5mTHF]=0 to 0.89 at [5mTHF]=5.2. Both V_BHMT and homocysteine decrease as [5mTHF] increases.
Fig. 7. The effect of [5mTHF] on the steady-state [Hcy] and VBHMT.::>

<a id='5fba0d0d-d3f0-4b43-9b74-d261d61ec921'></a>

V_BHMT) and activates cystathionine synthase (raises V_CBS) thus increasing the fraction transsulfurated.
Folate deficiency. Many physiological studies have been done that relate the behavior of methionine metabolism to variation in folate levels. In our model, folate enters via _5mTHF_. Fig. 7 shows that the steady-state level of [Hcy] and the steady-state rate V_BHMT increase significantly with a decline in _5mTHF_. These results are in close agreement with the findings of Finkelstein and Martin (1984) who demonstrated an increase in the activity of betaine:homocysteine S-methyltransferase upon removal of _5mTHF_. The increase of Hcy is in accord with the widespread observation that folate insufficiency is associated with elevated levels of homocysteine (see, for example, Carmel, 2001). Consistent with a number of studies (e.g. Jacob et al., 1998), a reduction of the folate level in our model, resulted in a slight decrease in methylation rate (not shown).

<a id='9e74298b-7b8f-4dcc-8209-424b986c4669'></a>

The explanation for these changes in the presence of folate deficiency is as follows. At steady state, the methylation rate declines only slightly because it is very insensitive to [AdoMet] (see Fig. 4). Thus, the flux around the pathway will be only a little less than 400 µM/h. Since Metin = 200 µM/h, we must have VCBS = 200 µM/h at steady state. Thus the remethylation flux from Hcy to Met must be a little less than 200 µM/h. However, the rate VMS has declined because of the folate deficiency. Thus the rate VBHMT must rise. This could be accomplished in two ways, by increasing [Hcy] or by lowering [AdoMet], which removes inhibition from VBHMT. In the model, and in experiments, both occur.

<a id='b7638af8-a009-490a-9c37-983e14acebba'></a>

Cystathionine ̖-synthase activity. Genetic deficiency in cystathionine ̖-synthase causes an accumulation of Hcy and Met, Finkelstein (1990), as does a deficiency in vitamin B6, which is a required cofactor for this enzyme. As one can see in Fig. 8, Hcy accumulates to significantly higher levels in the model when we decrease cystathionine synthase activity. The model also produces an increase in the level of Met but only at reduced

<a id='05d04939-5cf6-4362-9894-c148660f2680'></a>

<::chart: A multi-panel line chart showing the effects of variation in cystathionine β-synthase activity on the metabolites of the methionine cycle at steady-state. The common Y-axis is labeled "Concentration (µM)". The common X-axis is labeled "Relative cystathionine β-synthase activity", with tick marks from 0.0 to 2.2. Key X-axis labels include "deficiency" (around 0.0-0.6), "normal" (at 1.0), and "trisomy" (at 1.5). Each panel shows two curves: a solid line representing Metin = 100 µM/h and a dashed line representing Metin = 200 µM/h. Normal cystathionine β-synthase activity is designated as 1.0 on the abscissa. The activity of cystathionine β-synthase given a triple genetic dosage (as in trisomy 21) is indicated by 1.5. The star indicates the level to which the steady-state concentration of methionine rises when VBHMT is increased from 2500 to 3500 µM/h (see text). The chart is divided into four sub-panels: (A) Methionine: Y-axis ranges from 50 to 55 µM. Both solid and dashed lines initially increase, then decrease. The dashed line is generally higher. An asterisk with an upward arrow is shown on the solid line around x=1.5. (B) AdoMet: Y-axis ranges from 80 to 140 µM. Both solid and dashed lines decrease across the x-axis range. The dashed line is consistently higher than the solid line. (C) AdoHcy: Y-axis ranges from 5 to 35 µM. Both solid and dashed lines decrease across the x-axis range. The dashed line is consistently higher than the solid line. (D) Homocysteine: Y-axis ranges from 0.0 to 3.0 µM. Both solid and dashed lines decrease across the x-axis range. The dashed line is consistently higher than the solid line.::>

<a id='eb729d0b-c9c7-48f2-95ed-5419a6c2052a'></a>

levels of _Metin_ (see _Metin_ = 100 in Panel A of Fig. 8).
The flux V_CBS_ must remain equal to _Metin_ at steady
state. This could be accomplished in two ways: first,
[Hcy] can increase, and second, [AdoMet] and [AdoHcy]
can increase enhancing cystathionine ̖-synthase activ-
ity. Both methods occur in practice, both in the model
and in experiments.

<a id='b9e0358e-9ad5-4084-af5f-6e14ddb7042a'></a>

Excess cystathionine β-synthase activity, as occurs in chromosome 21 trisomy, causes a reduction in the levels of *Met*, *AdoMet*, *AdoHcy*, and *Hcy* (Pogribna et al., 2001). These results are also produced by the model (see Panels A and D). As above, the flux *V*<sub>*CBS*</sub> must remain equal to *Metin* at steady state. Our simulations show

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='6fe5ee4b-7382-44f0-8344-e96b4626ddea'></a>

*M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33–43*

<a id='837e64f0-75c6-45fe-9346-6633531efcbe'></a>

41

<a id='1477f549-8f7b-442d-b56d-08e956315c3b'></a>

that this is accomplished by lowering [Hcy], and by lowering [AdoMet] and [AdoHcy], which decreases cystathionine β-synthase activity. Our simulations show that the effect of trisomy on [Met] and [AdoMet] is greatest under moderate Metin (100 μM/h) but that increasing Metin can reverse each of these effects. As can be seen from Fig. 8, the effects of trisomy on [AdoHcy] and [Hcy] can also be reversed by increasing Metin. In clinical practice, it is preferable to increase dietary betaine (it tastes better). As noted above, the effect of betaine in our model is incorporated in V<sup>BHMT</sup><sub>max</sub>. If we raise V<sup>BHMT</sup><sub>max</sub> from 2500 to 3500 μM/h in our model, the normal level of Met is restored (see the star in Panel A) but the levels of the other metabolites are largely unaffected.

<a id='37aa2309-e154-44a3-911c-c367f768225f'></a>

Genetic deficiency in *MATI* and *MATIII*. The enzymes *MATI* and *MATIII* are encoded by the same gene. *MATI* is a tetramer and *MATIII* is a dimer of the same polypeptide. Interestingly, these two isozymes have very different kinetic properties as can be seen from Eqs. (5)–(7). We modeled genetic deficiency in this gene by reducing V<sup>*MATI*</sup><sub>max</sub> and V<sup>*MATIII*</sup><sub>max</sub> to half their normal values. This resulted in a 70% increase in *Met* concentration. These results are consistent with the observations reported by Finkelstein (1990) and Mato et al. (2001), and the reason is straightforward. Deficiencies in *MATI* and *MATIII* cause a slowing of the rate at which *Met* is turned into *AdoMet* thus causing the input, *Metin*, to accumulate as *Met*. The steady-state concentrations of the other metabolites in the methionine cycle were completely unaffected.

<a id='a2bf11b4-631d-4a50-bfdb-dc7b985273ea'></a>

Betaine deficiency. Finkelstein and Martin (1984),
have reported that, in liver homogenates, the absence of
betaine causes an increase in cystathionine β-synthase
activity. As we will see, this seemingly paradoxical effect
is, in fact, a dynamic phenomenon that can easily be
understood by using the mathematical model. In our
model we simulate the absence of betaine by setting
V<sup>max</sup><sub>BHMT</sub> = 0. Fig. 9 shows the time course of V<sub>CBS</sub> after
removal of betaine. Starting from the steady-state rate
of 200 µM/h, V<sub>CBS</sub> rises rapidly to about 300 µM/h and
then returns to its steady-state level after about 2 h
(indeed, the steady-state level of V<sub>CBS</sub> must match
Metin). Finkelstein and Martin (1984), measured
cystathionine β-synthase activity by measuring the rate
of transsulfuration 10 min after the initiation of the
reaction, so what they observed was probably this
transient rise in V<sub>CBS</sub>.

<a id='ba1c0340-01e7-47da-9798-3aa8503b6d2c'></a>

But why does VCBS have this transient behavior?
When betaine is removed, [Hcy] rises rapidly driving the
increase of VCBS during the first hour. Because of the
drop in remethylation of Hcy to Met, the Met
concentration drops considerably (to 38 M) causing a
gradual, even more dramatic, drop in [Adomet] to
20 M. This, drop in [Adomet] greatly reduces the
activity of cystathionine ̖-synthase causing the rate

<a id='28c16cd7-368b-4803-86ef-3e0c87a35747'></a>

<::A multi-panel line chart showing the behavior of a system after removal of betaine at time = 0. The x-axis for all panels is "Time (hours)" from 0.0 to 2.5. The y-axes vary by panel. The panels are stacked vertically. The caption states: Fig. 9. The behavior of the system after removal of betaine at time = 0. The transsulfuration rate of Hcy (V_CBS) rises transiently and then returns to its original steady state. [Hcy] rises dramatically and the methylation rate (V_METH) drops.

Panel 1 (Top):
- Y-axis: "Rate (µM / hr)" ranging from 250 to 450.
- A solid line labeled "V_METH" starts around 400 at time 0, gradually decreases to approximately 260 by 2.5 hours.

Panel 2 (Upper Middle):
- Y-axis: "Concentration / Rate" ranging from 0 to 300.
- A solid line labeled "V_CBS" starts near 0 at time 0, sharply rises to a peak of about 320 around 0.25 hours, then gradually decreases to approximately 200 by 2.5 hours.

Panel 3 (Lower Middle):
- Y-axis: "Concentration / Rate" (or implicitly "Concentration (µM)" based on the substances) ranging from 0 to 150.
- A dashed line labeled "AdoMet" starts around 130 at time 0, decreases steadily to approximately 10 by 2.5 hours.
- A dotted line labeled "methionine" starts around 45 at time 0, slightly decreases to approximately 20 by 2.5 hours.

Panel 4 (Bottom):
- Y-axis: "Concentration (µM)" ranging from 0 to 3.
- A solid line labeled "homocysteine" starts around 1 at time 0, increases steadily to approximately 3.2 by 1.5 hours, and then levels off.::>

<a id='08f163fc-3a2a-45ea-a1b9-271d6808d7f0'></a>

$V_{CBS}$ to return to 200 µM/h even though [Hcy] remains greatly elevated. We remark that, in contrast to the stability of $V_{METH}$ under variations in *Metin* and [5mTHF] (see Figs. 4 and 5), removal of betaine causes a dramatic drop in methylation rate (Fig. 9).

Methionine synthase deficiency. It has been known for a long time that humans with impaired methionine synthase activity have hypomethionemia and homocys- teinuria (Finkelstein, 1974; Rosenblatt, 2001). In our model we expressed the impairment of methionine synthase activity by reducing $V_{MS}^{max}$. This models a mutational deficiency in the enzyme as well as a vitamin B12 deficiency. Our results show a slight decrease in [Met], a moderate decrease in *Adomet*, and a substantial increase in homocysteine, see Fig. 10. This makes sense. The increase in [Hcy] drives both the rates $V_{BHMT}$ and $V_{MS}$ up and the decrease in *Adomet* removes inhibition on $V_{BHMT}$ driving it up further. These combined effects

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='1cd57dbf-cb5b-499a-bdea-551021c2c52d'></a>

42

<a id='bf9f9ac7-645f-4a67-8daf-46630ba818f3'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33-43

<a id='a8ce2a64-c246-48e4-a27d-c46121724a86'></a>

<::chart: The image displays a multi-panel line chart titled "Fig. 10. The effect of variation of methionine synthase activity on the steady-state levels of three metabolites of the methionine cycle. Each panel shows two curves for Metin = 100 µM/h (dotted lines) and Metin = 200 µM/h (solid lines).". The common y-axis is labeled "Concentration (µM)" and the common x-axis is labeled "Methionine Synthase activity (Vmax)". The chart is divided into three vertical panels, each representing a different metabolite.

Top Panel: Shows the concentration of "methionine". The y-axis ranges from 51 to 54. The dotted line (Metin=100) starts around 51.2 and increases to approximately 52.2. The solid line (Metin=200) starts around 52.9 and increases to approximately 53.4.

Middle Panel: Shows the concentration of "AdoMet". The y-axis ranges from 80 to 160. The dotted line (Metin=100) starts around 85 and increases to approximately 100. The solid line (Metin=200) starts around 122 and increases to approximately 138.

Bottom Panel: Shows the concentration of "homocysteine". The y-axis ranges from 0.6 to 1.0. The dotted line (Metin=100) starts around 0.74 and decreases to approximately 0.64. The solid line (Metin=200) starts around 1.0 and decreases to approximately 0.88.::>

<a id='05bf2d7b-28f5-43a7-9c16-e215701a616e'></a>

compensate for the reduction in methionine synthase
activity. Our model also shows that the increase in
homocysteine (but not the decrease in _Met_) can be
reversed by decreasing _Metin_ (Fig. 10).

<a id='51b00eec-c579-4b24-8900-f1691a10198e'></a>

## 4. Discussion

We have shown that our model of the methionine cycle is able to simulate many of the key regulatory features of this interesting and complex mechanism. The model is relatively simple, but is based on known kinetics or approximations to kinetics. By computational experiments in which inputs and kinetic parameters were varied, we were able to determine the causal chains of events by which many of the experimentally observed effects arise. This quantitative approach to the analysis of the methionine cycle has allowed us to verify and understand the marvelous regulatory properties of this system discovered and emphasized by James Finkelstein.

<a id='8051e7f7-f545-4923-9996-c2b1ab3af97c'></a>

Of course, we recognize that this model is incomplete.
First, the kinetic parameters that we have used were
obtained from a wide variety of experiments on many
different animal models. Therefore the parameters may

<a id='ca7f0847-de86-41dc-80bb-a84ad30a928b'></a>

not closely resemble those of any specific in vivo system. Secondly, we have used simple, linear approximations to the potentially complex kinetics by which *Adomet* and *AdoHcy* alter the activities of cystathionine β-synthase and betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase. Thirdly, the methionine cycle does not operate in isolation. We have ignored the fact that *AdoMet* contributes to the polyamine cycle and inhibits the synthesis of *5mTHF*. Likewise we have not included the interconversion of homocysteine and homocysteine thiolactone, nor the effects of the protein pool on the concentrations of *Met* and cysteine. Fourthly, we have not considered the sequestration of components of this system in different subcellular compartments, nor have we considered the partitioning of substrates and metabolites between the cell and the circulatory system (Storch et al., 1988; Gregory and Scott, 1996; MacCoss et al., 2001; Gregory and Quinlivan, 2002). Finally, we have not considered how nutrient status may affect the levels of expression and therefore the activity of enzymes in the pathway. A full quantitative account of the role that the methionine cycle plays in whole-body physiology, will have to await the incorporation of many of these features.

<a id='f29efee2-c181-4d9c-831e-212f291f76f7'></a>

In spite of these limitations, the model gives a remarkably good simulation of a broad diversity of experimental results and clinical observations. Moreover, the computational experiments have allowed us to understand how the regulatory properties arise from the complex interactions among the metabolites and enzymes of the system. The stability of [Met], despite fluctuations in Metin and 5mTHF, arises from the kinetics properties of MATI and MATIII that insure rapid conversion of Met to AdoMet. The fact that the methylation reactions run at near saturation at physiological concentrations explains the stability of methylation rate in the presence of large fluctuations in AdoMet. The ability of AdoMet and AdoHcy to regulate the activities of cystathionine ̖-synthase and betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase enables the system to change the fraction of Hcy transsulfurated without significant changes in [Hcy]. Finally, the model allows us to understand why a variety of dietary deficiencies and genetic abnormalities cause [Hcy] to rise.

<a id='98bb5f47-a3e5-4ac9-9ff9-c238aae47366'></a>

### Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Professor Ruma Banerjee for helpful discussions of the paper of Martinov et al. (2000), and to Professors J. Gregory and S. Jill James who pointed out many important experimental results. We thank Paula Budu for help in preparation of the figures. This research was supported by NSF grants #DMS-0109872 and #IBN-9975168.

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='7fe749c4-884c-4603-a64a-256a0136a1a9'></a>

M.C. Reed et al. / Journal of Theoretical Biology 226 (2004) 33–43

<a id='125309c6-cd7a-441f-b00e-e8071d18cd6a'></a>

43

<a id='8e594aca-b709-4a93-ab61-d65c17a04acb'></a>

References

Banerjee, R., Frasca, V., Ballou, D., Matthews, R., 1990. Participation of Cob(I)alamin in the reaction catalysed by methionine synthase from Escherichia coli: a steady state and rapid reaction kinetic analysis. Biochem. 29, 11101–11109.

Banerjee, R., Chen, Z., Gulati, S., 1997. Methionine synthase from pig liver. Methods Enzymol. 281, 189–197.

Borcsok, E., Abeles, R., 1982. Mechanism of action of cystathionine synthase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 213, 695–707.

Brown, C., Gordon, P., 1971. Cystathionine synthase from rat liver: partial purification and properties. Can. J. Biochem. 49, 484–491.

Cabrero, C., Alemany, S., 1988. Purification and conversion of rat liver S-adenosyl-L-methionine synthetase from high-Mr low-Mr form by LiBr. Biochem. Biophys. Acta 952, 277–281.

Cabrero, C., Puerta, J., Alemany, S., 1987. Purification and comparison of two different forms of S-adenosyl-L-methionine synthase from rat liver. Eur. J. Biochem. 170, 299–304.

Carmel, R., 2001. Folate deficiency. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 271–288.

Cook, R.J., 2001. Folate metabolism. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 113–134.

Dueree, J., Wallwork, J., Quick, D., Ford, K., 1977. In vitro studies on the methylation of histones in rat brain nuclei. J. Biol. Chem. 252, 6981–6985.

Duthie, S.J., 1999. Folic acid deficiency and cancer: mechanisms of DNA instability. Brit. Med. Bull. 55, 578–592.

Eskes, T.K.A.B., 2001. Homocysteine in human reproduction. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 451–465.

Finkelstein, J., 1990. Methionine metabolism in mammals. J. Nutr. Biochem. 1, 228–237.

Finkelstein, J., 2001. Regulation of homocysteine metabolism. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 92–99.

Finkelstein, J., 2003. Methionine metabolism in liver disease. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 77, 1094–1095.

Finkelstein, J., Martin, J., 1984. Methionine metabolism in mammals: distribution of homocysteine between competing pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 9508–9513.

Finkelstein, J., Martin, J., 1986. Methionine metabolism in mammals: adaptation to methionine excess. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 1582–1587.

Finkelstein, J.D., Harris, B.J., Kyle, W.E., 1972. Methionine metabolism in mammals: kinetic study of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 153, 320–324.

Finkelstein, J.D., Harris, B.J., Martin, J.J., 1982. Methionine metabolism in mammals: concentrations of metabolites in rat tissues. Kinetic study of betaine:homocysteine methyltransferase. J. Nutr. 112, 1011–1018.

Gregory, J.F., Quinlivan, E.P., 2002. In vivo kinetics of folate metabolism. Ann. Rev. Nutr. 22, 199–220.

Gregory, J.F., Scott, K.C., 1996. Modeling folate metabolism. Adv. Food Nutr. Res. 40, 81–93.

Gregory, III.J.F., Williamson, J., Liao, J.-F., Bailey, L.B., Toth, J.P., 1998. Kinetic model of folate metabolism in nonpregnant women consuming [2H2] folic acid: isotopic labeling of urinary folate and the catabolite para-acetamidobenzoylglutamate indicates slow, intake-dependent, turnover of folate pools. J. Nutr. 128, 1896–1906.

<a id='5afc46b1-9966-455f-b6bd-d1d3573c66cb'></a>

Hoffman, J., 1983. Fractionation of methionine adonosyltransferase isozymes (rat liver). Methods Enzymol. 94, 223-228.
Hoffman, J., Cornatzer, W., 1978. Fractionation of methionine adonosyltransferase isozymes (rat liver). Methods Enzymol. 94, 223-228.
Hoffman, J., Cornatzer, W., Duerre, J., 1979. Relationship between tissue levels of A-adenosylmethionine, S-adenosylhomocysteine and transmethylation reactions. Can. J. Biochem. 57, 56-65.
Hoffman, J., Marion, D.W., Cornatzer, W., Duerre, J., 1980. S-adenosylmethionine and S-adenosylhomocysteine metabolism in isolated rat liver. Effects of L-methionine, L-homocysteine, and adenosine. J. Biol. Chem. 255, 10822-10827.
Jacob, R., Gretz, D., Taylor, P., James, S., Pogribny, I., Miller, B., Henning, S., Swendseid, M., 1998. Moderate folate depletion increases plasma homocysteine and decreases DNA methylation in post-menopausal women. J. Nutr. 128, 1204-1212.
Kashiwamata, S., Greenberg, D., 1970. Studies on cystathionine synthase of rat liver: properties of the highly purified enzyme. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 212, 488-500.
Kerr, S., Headly, J., 1974. Modulation of tRNA methyltrasferase activity by competing enzyme systems. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 12, 4248-4252.
MacCoss, M.J., Fukagawa, N.K., Matthews, D.E., 2001. Measurement of intracellular sulfur amino acid metabolism in humans. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 280, E947-E955.
Martinov, M., Vitvitsky, V., Mosharov, E., Banerjee, R., Ataullakhanov, F., 2000. A substrate switch: a new mode of regulation in the methionine metabolic pathway. J. Theor. Biol. 204, 521-532.
Mato, J., Matias, A., Corrales, F., 2001. Biosynthesis of S-adenosylmethionine. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 47-62.
Nakagawa, H., Kimura, H., 1968. Purification and properties of cystathionine synthetase from rat liver: separation of cystathionine synthetase from serine dehydratase. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 32, 208-214.
Ogawa, H., Fujioka, M., 1982. Purification and properties of glycine N-methyltransferase from rat liver. J. Biol. Chem. 257, 3447-3452.
Pogribna, M., Melnyk, S., Pogrybny, I., Chango, A., Yi, P., James, J., 2001. Homocysteine metabolism in children with Down Syndrome: in vitro modulation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69, 88-95.
Potter, J.D., 1999. Colorectal cancer: molecules and populations. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 91, 916-932.
Prigge, S.T., Chiang, P.K., 2001. S-Adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 79-91.
Refsum, H., Ueland, P.M., Nygard, O., Vollset, S.E., 1998. Homocysteine and cardiovascular disease. Ann. Rev. Med. 49, 31-62.
Rosenblatt, D., 2001. Inborn errors of folate and cobalamin metabolism. In: Carmel, R., Jacobsen, D.W. (Eds.), Homocysteine in Health and Disease. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 244-258.
Segel, I.H., 1975. Enzyme Kinetics. Wiley, New York.
Storch, K.J., Wagner, D.A., Burke, J.F., Young, V.R., 1988. Study in vivo of methionine cycle in humans using [methyl-2H3]- and [1-13] methionine. Am. J. Physiol. 255, E322-E331.
Sullivan, D., Hoffmann, J., 1983. Fractionation and kinetic properties of rat liver and kidney methionine adonosyltransferase isozymes. Biochemistry 22, 1636-1641.
Yeo, E.-J., Wagner, C., 1992. Purification and properties of pancreatic glycine N-methyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 24669-24674.