<a id='621a2478-28d8-4258-9e02-37306ace84b7'></a>

Biochem. J. (2000) 345, 321–334 (Printed in Great Britain)

<a id='12e5fe19-1f99-4049-8600-06484bdc6d09'></a>

321

<a id='852d64d5-e856-41f4-acfe-c513dad4be59'></a>

Effect of cellular interaction on glycolytic oscillations in yeast:
a theoretical investigation

<a id='a1ad944b-7558-4138-a559-faca5c994a02'></a>

Jana WOLF and Reinhart HEINRICH¹
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Biologie, Theoretische Biophysik, Invalidenstrasse 42, D-10115 Berlin, Germany

<a id='4bd0e09a-7801-4113-87ea-cec517bee2ec'></a>

On the basis of a detailed model of yeast glycolysis, the effect of
intercellular coupling on the oscillatory dynamics is analysed
theoretically. The model includes the main steps of anaerobic
glycolysis, and the production of ethanol and glycerol. Transmembrane
diffusion of acetaldehyde is included, since it has been
hypothesized that this substance mediates the interaction.
Depending on the kinetic parameters, the single-cell model shows
both stationary and oscillatory behaviour. This agrees with
experimental data with respect to metabolite concentrations and
phase shifts. The inclusion of intercellular coupling leads to a
variety of dynamical modes, such as synchronous oscillations,
and different kinds of asynchronous behaviour. These oscillations
can co-exist, leading to bi- and tri-rhythmicity. The corresponding
parameter regions have been identified by a bifurcation
analysis. The oscillatory dynamics of synchronized cell popul-

<a id='edcbf256-e467-4c51-8fe3-201c14aefa72'></a>

ations are investigated by calculating the phase responses to acetaldehyde pulses. Simulations are performed with respect to the synchronization of two subpopulations that are oscillating out of phase before mixing. The effect of the various processes on synchronization is characterized quantitatively. While continuous exchange of acetaldehyde might synchronize the oscillations for appropriate sets of parameter values, the calculated synchronization time is longer than that observed experimentally. It is concluded either that, in addition to the transmembrane exchange of acetaldehyde, other processes may contribute to intercellular coupling, or that intracellular regulatory feedback plays a role in the acceleration of the synchronization.

<a id='fb197927-17de-42e5-ad1c-9a8d8a0619cd'></a>

Key words: control coefficient, glycolysis, metabolic oscillations,
phase response, synchronization.

<a id='1edc1e34-bf8f-4d7c-b6bd-74be6cbccfee'></a>

# INTRODUCTION

Glycolytic oscillations are one of the best studied examples of rhythmic behaviour on the cellular level. They occur in a broad spectrum of cells, e.g. in yeast, muscle, heart, and in pancreatic ̢-cells. The oscillations have been studied most extensively in suspensions and extracts of yeast cells. It was observed that all glycolytic intermediates oscillate with the same period, but with different phases, and that this period is in the range of 1 min (for recent reports, see [1,2]). The underlying oscillatory mechanism was found to be strongly dependent on the kinetic properties of the enzyme phosphofructokinase (PFK). This enzyme is highly regulated: it is activated by its substrate, fructose 6-phosphate, by its product, ADP and, in some cells, by its second product, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. ATP acts at higher concentrations as an inhibitor, whereas AMP activates this enzyme. Theoretical models studying the occurrence of glycolytic oscillations are based on one or several of these regulatory effects. In addition to core models [3-5], more detailed models [6-8] have also been developed. Whereas the first group of models takes into account a feedback activation by either fructose 1,6-bisphosphate or

<a id='2dc05538-e264-4426-afd9-8819a195df7e'></a>

ADP, the second group includes activatory and inhibitory effects of AMP and ATP respectively. The incorporation of adenine nucleotide concentrations as system variables necessitates the inclusion of ATP production in the second part of glycolysis, as well as of non-glycolytic, ATP-consuming processes (ATPases). It is generally thought that, in muscle cells, the generation of oscillations is due to the regulation of PFK by fructose 1,6-bisphosphate [8,9], whereas, in yeast, the same enzyme is mainly regulated by the adenine nucleotides.

<a id='9eb09bfb-7aa6-43f5-b70c-dbd64b49ff0c'></a>

In yeast cell suspensions the oscillations of glycolysis have been followed experimentally on the population level via monitoring mean concentrations, i.e. of NADH. In this way, only limited information has been obtained about the dynamics of a single cell within such a population [10]. Obviously, the existence of sustained oscillations on the population level implies that the individual cells also oscillate, and that the single cells are synchronized, at least to a certain extent. The existence of synchronizing interactions was also demonstrated directly by the mixing of two subpopulations that oscillate out of phase. In the resulting population, the oscillations are first damped, but reoccur after several cycles [11–13].

<a id='33822799-86be-4d80-8d26-49e7461951a4'></a>

Abbreviation used: PFK, phosphofructokinase.
System variables (concentrations of metabolites) used: S₁, glucose; S₂, pool of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate; S₃,
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate; S₄, pool of pyruvate and acetaldehyde in the cytosol; S₄ᵉˣ, coupling substance in the external solution; A₂, ADP; A₃, ATP; N₁,
NAD⁺; N₂, NADH.

<a id='f608af8a-4455-419d-8525-45a19f14a7de'></a>

Parameters used: J₀, input flux of glucose via the cellular membrane; k₁, rate constant of the lumped hexokinase/phosphoglucoisomerase/PFK reaction; k₂, rate constant of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase reaction; k₃, rate constant of the lumped phosphoglycerate kinase/phosphoglycerate mutase/enolase/pyruvate kinase reaction; k₄, rate constant of the alcohol dehydrogenase reaction; k₅, rate constant of non-glycolytic ATP consumption; k₆, rate constant of the lumped reaction transforming triose phosphates into glycerol; k, rate constant of the degradation of the coupling substance within the extracellular medium; κ, kinetic constant of the transmembrane flux of the coupling substance; φ, ratio of the total cellular volume to the extracellular volume; N, sum of the concentrations of NAD⁺ and NADH; A, sum of the concentrations of ADP and ATP; n, number of interacting cells; T, oscillation period; τ, phase shift between cells.

¹ To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail reinhart=heinrich@rz.hu-berlin.de).

<a id='445f2ae3-9abe-4fa0-857d-9afbd9ad9acd'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='9787a780-58f8-443a-84a4-7d2c57c7dde4'></a>

322

<a id='b262ab72-c34d-4d07-9829-bf7e90a7efc8'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='408ddc7d-cc3f-48e7-9580-2a20677ac1e9'></a>

The models of glycolytic oscillations mentioned above are restricted to the case of single cells. The mathematical description of the effects of cellular coupling is still an open problem; in particular, for complex metabolic processes. A number of experiments, studying the nature of coupling, have suggested that cells interact by the exchange of a metabolic intermediate via the external medium. Ethanol, pyruvate and acetaldehyde have been discussed as candidates for the coupling metabolites [10,11,14]. Recent studies have yielded strong evidence that acetaldehyde mediates the coupling [13]. In particular, it was demonstrated that acetaldehyde is secreted by the cells, and that the extracellular concentration of this compound oscillates. Moreover, the cells respond to acetaldehyde pulses. These observations imply that the dynamics of a population are determined not only by the intracellular kinetics, but also by the exchange of substances between cells. The consequences of this hypothesis are addressed in the present theoretical study.

<a id='a2defa8b-dda6-496b-bb78-db13c621aacf'></a>

There are some indications that populations of cells do not always synchronize, but might also lose their synchrony [10]. This corresponds to theoretical results obtained for a two-component model, in which oscillations originate from a feedback-activation mechanism, and in which the effects of interactions within a population of identical cells were investigated in detail [15]. It was found that the transmembrane diffusion of a metabolite might lead to synchronized, as well as to desynchronized, states, depending on the values of the system parameters. In this basic model, two different types of asynchronous limit cycles may arise, corresponding (i) to regular asynchronous behaviour, where the amplitudes of the oscillating variables are the same in all cells and where the phase shifts between the cells are multiples of the reciprocal value of the number of cells, and (2) to non-regular asynchronous oscillations with non-identical oscillations in different cells and non-regular phase shifts. Simulations show that this dynamical behaviour might result in 'hidden oscillations', where large variations in the cellular concentrations are not represented by the corresponding mean values.

<a id='b8b0dd66-df5e-4d89-a78a-ad33f4daffcf'></a>

In the present study, we extend our analysis of intercellular communication to the case of glycolytic oscillations. To meet this aim, we have developed a detailed model for anaerobic energy metabolism in yeast cells. Compared with our previous investigations [15], we have arrived at a model comprising many variables for a single cell. A consideration of the coupling of these cells leads to a further increase of complexity, which can be analysed only by numerical methods. The identification of parameter regions with different dynamic behaviour was performed by bifurcation analysis using the software package AUTO [16].

<a id='c6da809a-3b9e-439c-a673-8cbcbf9d01a0'></a>

## THE MODEL

### The reaction scheme

The starting point for our model is energy metabolism in yeast cells under anaerobic conditions, with the respiratory chain in a completely inhibited state and only alcoholic fermentation taking place. The reaction network of a single cell is represented by Scheme 1. It contains the main reactions of glycolysis, and adjacent reactions producing ethanol and glycerol.

<a id='392a4411-19e7-4434-ba89-02faf4848ad0'></a>

The individual processes in Scheme 1 are shown to represent
the following: flux 0 ($J_0$), input of glucose via the cellular
membrane; reaction 1 (where the reactions are shown in the
Scheme by $v_1$, $v_2$, etc.), lumped reactions of hexokinase, phospho-
glucoisomerase and PFK; reaction 2, glyceraldehyde-3-phos-
phate dehydrogenase reaction; reaction 3, lumped reactions of
phosphoglycerate kinase, phosphoglycerate mutase, enolase and

<a id='bf76d5d8-9ed7-4dcc-8590-66b5063b1c4e'></a>

<::chart: Reaction scheme for a single cell::>cytosol is shown at the top right, with a double horizontal line separating it from the extracellular space. glucose enters the cytosol from the top, indicated by an arrow labeled J0. Inside the cytosol, glucose is converted, with an input of ATP and output of ADP (labeled v1, with a dashed arrow from ATP and solid to ADP), to glyceraldehyde-3-P/dihydroxyacetone-P. From glyceraldehyde-3-P/dihydroxyacetone-P, there are two pathways: 1. To glycerol, with NADH being converted to NAD+ (labeled v6). 2. To 1,3-bisphospho-glycerate, with NAD+ being converted to NADH (labeled v2). 1,3-bisphospho-glycerate is then converted to pyruvate/acetaldehyde, with an input of ADP and output of ATP (labeled v3, with a dashed arrow from ADP and solid to ATP). A separate reaction v5 shows ADP interconverting with ATP. From pyruvate/acetaldehyde, there are two pathways: 1. To ethanol, with NADH being converted to NAD+ (labeled v4). 2. Exiting the cell, indicated by a double-headed arrow labeled J, leading to pyruvate/acetaldehyde ex. An arrow labeled v7 points downwards from pyruvate/acetaldehyde ex. Scheme 1 Reaction scheme for a single cell. The scheme shows the main reactions of anaerobic glycolysis in yeast, in addition to transmembrane transport of glucose and the coupling substance (pyruvate and/or acetaldehyde). For further details and explanation of the symbols used, see the text.<::

<a id='80005c1b-09b1-49d1-b5d7-08b603b07135'></a>

pyruvate kinase; reaction 4, alcohol dehydrogenase reaction;
reaction 5, non-glycolytic ATP consumption; reaction 6,
formation of glycerol from triose phosphates; and reaction 7,
degradation of the coupling substance in the extracellular me-
dium. Furthermore, the model includes the membrane transport
of the coupling substance, characterized by the flux, J.

<a id='4d048158-884b-47fe-881d-db6108440b59'></a>

A₃ and A₂, and N₁ and N₂ denote the concentrations of ATP and ADP, and NAD⁺ and NADH, respectively. Owing to the fact that several glycolytic reactions are omitted and that other reactions are lumped, the model variables denote, in some cases, the concentrations of pools of intermediates, rather than concentrations of individual compounds. This concerns the pool of the triose phosphates, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxy- acetone phosphate (variable S₂), and the pool of pyruvate and acetaldehyde (variable S₄). The concentration of glucose is represented by the variable S₁, and that of 1,3-bisphospho- glycerate by S₃. Furthermore, the lumping process implies that the concentrations of some compounds do not appear as separate model variables. Such a reduction in model complexity may be justified by quasi-steady-state approximations for the concen- tration of metabolites located between the lumped reactions, as shown in detail previously [17].

<a id='d34b8efa-eef1-4987-b058-8d0602686a5b'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='4b8de60f-c8ee-4adf-a28b-495abe0967bf'></a>

Intercellular coupling of glycolytic oscillations

<a id='fdbf8c09-be3d-49fa-a807-907e17ff63fb'></a>

323

<a id='9153f15d-0eec-4bb0-95fa-22a881fcfa9b'></a>

In Scheme 1, the broken arrows in reactions 1 and 3 indicate that, in these lumped reactions, two molecules of the adenine nucleotides are converted, which corresponds to the overall stoichiometry of glycolysis. In reaction 1, two molecules of S$_{2}$ are produced (denoted by the arrow with two heads), corresponding to the splitting of a hexose phosphate into triose phosphates.

<a id='573024af-4c95-41c7-b7d2-38c905bd60c3'></a>

S^ex denotes the concentration of the coupling substance in the external solution. According to the definition of the pool compound S_4, it represents pyruvate and/or acetaldehyde. This corresponds to experimental results [13], which strongly suggest that acetaldehyde is the coupling metabolite. It was shown that cyanide produces, in addition to the inhibition of respiration, a second effect; that is, the partial removal of acetaldehyde [13]. Therefore an external degradation of the coupling substance due to the reaction of acetaldehyde with cyanide to yield lactonitrile is included in the present model.

<a id='a81ab2d9-9f17-42a3-a8cb-354a87aca417'></a>

## Mathematical description
The reaction rates are denoted by v, where the reactions are numbered by the subscript j and the cells are numbered by the superscript a. The irreversible input flux of glucose and the reversible transmembrane flux of the coupling substance are denoted by Jo and Ja respectively. The latter flux is counted positive if it is directed from the intra- to the extra-cellular medium. The kinetic equations, characterizing the functional dependence of the reaction rates on the metabolite concentrations, are assumed to have the same form for all cells. Furthermore, the cells are identical with respect to the kinetic parameters. All reactions, as well as their input, are considered to be irreversible. The reaction rates are described by linear and bilinear functions of the concentrations of their substrates, except for the first reaction (lumped reaction of hexokinase and PFK), where inhibition by ATP, according to the substrate inhibition of PFK, is additionally taken into account. In detail, the kinetic equations read:

<a id='e9ebc91d-6016-4b5b-b51b-3b67aaad468d'></a>

v₁ = k₁ S₁ A₃f (A₃), with f(A₃) = [1 + (A₃ / Kᵢ)^q]⁻¹ (1a)
v₂ = k₂ S₂ N₁ (1b)
v₃ = k₃ S₃ A₂ (1c)
v₄ = k₄ S₄ N₂ (1d)
v₅ = k₅ A₃ (1e)
v₆ = k₆ S₂ N₂ (1f)
v₇ = k S₄^ex (1g)

<a id='1b65d569-9b0b-4401-90ba-99a20d8d42e4'></a>

To obtain from equation system (1) the reaction rates v_i^c for a given cell ̑, one has to introduce the metabolite concentrations in that cell. k_j (j = 1,..., 6) and k are rate constants; K_I and q are the inhibition constant and the co-operativity coefficient of the ATP inhibition respectively. For the transmembrane fluxes, we use:

<a id='85a002ef-b3ae-4843-b4ea-3b5624071f8c'></a>

J₀ = constant (2a)
Jᶻ = κ(Sᶻ₄ - Sᵉˣ₄) (2b)

<a id='51df08a4-081c-40d1-ac3e-2b66b6707fc9'></a>

where the kinetic constant κ is related to the permeability (P) of the membrane for the coupling substance S₄ by the equation:

κ = A_s P/V (2c)

<a id='cce7d2dd-a78a-478d-bd1b-0451f0416ce6'></a>

where $A_s$ represents the membrane surface and $V$ is the cellular volume.

<a id='aa3ca505-6958-4372-a0d2-088f52fcf65e'></a>

We assume that the intracellular metabolites are distributed
homogeneously in each cell, and the exchangeable ones in the
external solution. The latter assumption corresponds to the
experimental situation of a well-stirred solution. The differential
equation system of the model for n coupled cells reads:

<a id='828d6eef-e653-4aaa-b711-2aff0ec5182b'></a>

dS^z_1 / dt = J_0 - v^z_1 (3a)

<a id='f0e288c0-c276-427f-80ab-8d97949f2cff'></a>

$$\frac{dS_z}{dt} = 2v_1^z - v_2^z - v_6^z \quad (3b)$$

<a id='1da2c899-3485-4ee3-8b6b-fc0e9eb7716b'></a>

$$\frac{dS^\alpha_3}{dt} = v^\alpha_2 - v^\alpha_3 \quad (3c)$$$$

<a id='cb8299e4-dca0-4c80-9e0b-318fa9e975bb'></a>

$$\frac{dS_4^z}{dt} = v_3^z - v_4^z - J^z \quad (3d)$$

<a id='f124f6c4-89d0-4d2b-8577-ae4dee9fdd65'></a>

$$\frac{dN_2^{\alpha}}{dt} = v_2^{\alpha} - v_4^{\alpha} - v_6^{\alpha} \qquad (3e)$$

<a id='767d73f2-86cd-4853-a0fb-42495922523f'></a>

$\frac{dA_3^x}{dt} = -2v_1^x + 2v_3^x - v_5^x$ (3f)

<a id='2dc48c9c-9ca1-4373-b116-892e71e4a7d3'></a>

dS_4^{ex} / dt = (φ / n) Σ_{α=1}^{n} J^α - v_7 (3g)

<a id='f0c40840-9328-429c-8d44-58de84af998d'></a>

where α = 1,...,n. Therefore the model for a population of n cells contains (6n+1) variables. The differential equations for N^α_1 and A^α_2 are omitted, since these concentrations follow from the conservation conditions:

N^α_1 + N^α_2 = N = constant (4a)
A^α_2 + A^α_3 = A = constant (4b)

<a id='c419e84e-b550-478e-b8c7-f819ae1acb21'></a>

φ denotes the ratio of the total cellular volume, V_c = nV, to the extracellular volume, V_E.

<a id='6f6f2171-81e0-4f6e-bade-eb6260f748de'></a>

## STEADY STATES
The model for a population of _n_ cells has a symmetric steady state, characterized by identical sets of stationary metabolite concentrations for all cells. These concentrations are the same as

<a id='8759b9d5-429f-4341-bec6-3d50589429ba'></a>

Table 1 Parameter values of the reference state
<table id="2-1">
<tr><td id="2-2">Parameter</td><td id="2-3">Value</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-4">J₀</td><td id="2-5">3.0 mM·min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-6">k₁</td><td id="2-7">100.0 mM⁻¹·min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-8">k₂</td><td id="2-9">6.0 mM⁻¹·min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-a">k₃</td><td id="2-b">16.0 mM⁻¹·min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-c">k₄</td><td id="2-d">100.0 mM⁻¹·min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-e">k₅</td><td id="2-f">1.28 min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-g">k₆</td><td id="2-h">12.0 mM⁻¹·min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-i">k</td><td id="2-j">1.3 min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-k">K</td><td id="2-l">13.0 min⁻¹</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-m">q (visual)</td><td id="2-n">4.0</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-o">K (visual)</td><td id="2-p">0.52 mM</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-q">N (visual)</td><td id="2-r">1.0 mM</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-s">A (visual)</td><td id="2-t">4.0 mM</td></tr>
<tr><td id="2-u">φ (visual)</td><td id="2-v">0.1</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='ddb0e171-7fee-41e7-93f1-90cc8db24187'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='46898b26-04ae-4e2f-8199-369965720707'></a>

324

<a id='9bdc5d02-faf1-4607-bebc-93cae50b4a57'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='79ba76c7-3b16-43ff-9fe1-6f47084427eb'></a>

Table 2 Stationary concentrations in the reference state
<table id="3-1">
<tr><td id="3-2">Metabolite</td><td id="3-3">Concentration (mM)</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-4">S₁</td><td id="3-5">5.8</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-6">S₂</td><td id="3-7">0.9</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-8">S₃</td><td id="3-9">0.2</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-a">S₄</td><td id="3-b">0.2</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-c">N₂</td><td id="3-d">0.1</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-e">A₃</td><td id="3-f">2.4</td></tr>
<tr><td id="3-g">S⁴ex</td><td id="3-h">0.1</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='f0c0f9e6-9903-4bca-81bf-87282bc2cfca'></a>

in the case of a single cell. Despite the non-linearity of the
algebraic steady-state equations, an explicit solution can be
found (see Appendix A).

<a id='cf767edf-7c1f-4923-9d57-606bc5412999'></a>

The reference state of the model is defined by the combination
of kinetic parameters listed in Table 1, and the corresponding
stationary concentrations of metabolites are given in Table 2.
The parameter values of that reference state have been selected
in such a way that the metabolite concentrations are in a realistic
range for yeast cells [2]. For most investigations presented below,
the parameters are fixed to their reference values, except J₀, φ and
k, which are treated as bifurcation parameters. This choice is
dictated by the fact that the input flux, the cell density and the
rate of degradation of the coupling substance are under ex-
perimental control.

<a id='1c437b2a-5ae6-48ba-b56d-6a049821afe6'></a>

For n > 1, in addition to eqns. (A1)–(A7) (see Appendix A), there are further solutions of the steady-state equation system, with non-identical values of the corresponding variables in different cells. In all cases studied, one or more concentration variables become negative; therefore, these mathematical solutions have no biochemical meaning.

<a id='6671dd01-ae0d-407c-9de4-d50b2c4cc2e1'></a>

The stability of the symmetric steady state of n interacting cells
was analysed by linearization of the system eqns. (1)–(4) in the
vicinity of the steady state given in eqns. (A1)–(A7). As shown in
Appendix B, the characteristic polynomial of the eigenvalues λ of
the Jacobian may be factorized for n > 1 into two parts, such that:

F(λ) · D(λ)ⁿ⁻¹ = 0 (5)

<a id='564d83cc-07b9-439d-9993-2c9f9dd155f3'></a>

The factor F(λ) corresponds to the polynomial of the single cell,
and is therefore of seventh degree. The other factor, D(λ),
appearing in the power of (n − 1), is of sixth degree. The possibility
of such a factorization was also demonstrated in the minimal
model [15]. The solutions of eqn. (5) determine the stability of the
stationary state. In the region of instability, we observed oscil-
lations in the case of a single and many cells.

<a id='86bb0dbc-64ff-44e9-8e04-3fbfbb497f8f'></a>

**DYNAMICS OF A SINGLE CELL**
We first studied the dynamics of a single cell by determining
the system behaviour as the parameter k is varied. This led to the
bifurcation diagram for the concentration of NADH (variable
N₂) in Figure 1. All parameters, except k, take the values of the
reference set (Table 1). The steady state is stable (continuous
line) for small k values (low external degradation rates of
acetaldehyde) and unstable (broken line) for higher values of this
parameter. Filled circles and open circles indicate the amplitudes
of stable and unstable limit cycle oscillations respectively. The
point H indicates a Hopf bifurcation, which follows from the
roots of the characteristic polynomial given in eqn. (5), which,
for n = 1, is reduced to F(λ) = 0. The bifurcation is subcritical,
i.e. an unstable limit cycle originates from the steady-state
branch. The limit cycle becomes stable at the point L. In the

<a id='33d2cab0-64dd-4628-bf47-6abe1cbec558'></a>

<::chart: Bifurcation diagram of the NADH concentration for a single cell. The x-axis is labeled 'k (min⁻¹)' ranging from 0 to 5. The y-axis is labeled 'N₂ (mM)' ranging from 0 to 0.3. The plot shows steady-state values and the maxima and minima of oscillations for the variable N₂ at different values of the bifurcation parameter, k. A solid line represents steady-state values, showing a curve that drops to a point labeled 'L' (saddle-node bifurcation) at k_L = 0.49 min⁻¹. Another solid line branches off from 'L' and continues to higher N₂ values. An open circle curve, representing an unstable limit cycle, forms a loop, with a point labeled 'H' (Hopf bifurcation) at k_H = 1.38 min⁻¹. Filled circles represent stable limit cycles, forming two branches: one starting near k_L and increasing in N₂, and another starting near the upper part of the solid line and increasing in N₂. A dashed-dotted line is also present, indicating an unstable steady state.::>Figure 1 Bifurcation diagram of the NADH concentration for a single cell Shown are the steady-state values and the maxima and minima of the oscillations for the variable N₂ at different values of the bifurcation parameter, k. Parameter values of the bifurcation points: k_H = 1.38 min⁻¹, k_L = 0.49 min⁻¹. H and L denote a Hopf bifurcation and a saddle-node bifurcation respectively. Open circles represent an unstable limit cycle; filled circles show stable limit cycles. 

<a id='d64c6555-4904-42c3-bae6-0d32f0178c52'></a>

region k_L ≤ k < k_H, a stable steady state co-exists with a stable limit cycle, whereas, for k_H ≤ k, a limit cycle is the unique stable solution. Figure 2 shows the oscillation period T in the same range of k as that used in Figure 1. The period decreases from 1.8 min to about 1.2 min if k is increased from 0.49 to 5.0 min⁻¹. This range for the period is comparable with the experimental values [2,18].

<a id='7ea1f8f3-1700-4f78-8617-21616b2cc3c9'></a>

Experimental data indicate that the oscillating cellular metabolite concentrations have characteristic phase shifts. In particular, the following pairs of variables, ATP/ADP, NAD+/NADH, ATP/NADH and fructose 6-phosphate/fructose 1,6-bis-phosphate, oscillate 180° out of phase. Furthermore, glucose 6-

<a id='9ed2158e-4dcc-4ebc-95f6-19e35042d487'></a>

<::transcription of the content: chart::> k (min⁻¹) versus T (min) plot. The x-axis is labeled "k (min⁻¹)" and ranges from 0 to 5, with specific labels at k_L and k_H. The y-axis is labeled "T (min)" and ranges from 1 to 2. Two curves are plotted: one with solid black dots, labeled "L" near its upper left starting point, which decreases from T approximately 1.8 at k approximately 0.5 to T approximately 1.25 at k=5. The second curve, plotted with hollow circles, is labeled "H" near its lower right end point, and it decreases from T approximately 1.8 at k approximately 0.5 to T approximately 1.2 at k approximately 1.5. Figure 2 Bifurcation diagram of the oscillation period for a single cell. Period T of the limit cycle oscillations as a function of k for the same parameter range as in Figure 1.


<a id='59597007-a7ce-4cea-83a3-43bcb05cd8af'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='8ae06958-fa5a-4ae5-ba17-30c5d24b9c97'></a>

Intercellular coupling of glycolytic oscillations

<a id='a6c6e9dc-01f0-4e56-8c68-3bdb78ae747d'></a>

325

<a id='045a1d99-36dd-4263-a9b8-6707237ce894'></a>

phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate, as well as AMP and ADP,
oscillate in phase, and the phase shift of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
and NADH is 70° [2].

<a id='c59cee42-0d52-455e-9755-b784e7e8d893'></a>

Numerical integrations for k > k_L revealed that the phase shift of ATP and NADH is well reproduced by our model. This also includes the anti-phase relation of ATP/ADP, and that of NAD$^{+}$/NADH, which, however, are direct consequences of the conservation conditions (eqns. 4a and 4b). The substrate S_1 and the product S_2 of the regulated reaction 1 oscillate almost in anti-phase, which show some correspondence to the out-of-phase oscillation of the substrate (fructose 6-phosphate) and product (fructose 1,6-bisphosphate) of PFK.

<a id='75325f83-8594-4e97-a538-07cb80296a36'></a>

TWO INTERACTING CELLS: BIFURCATION ANALYSIS AND
DYNAMICAL BEHAVIOUR

Figure 3 shows a schematic representation of the bifurcation diagram
of two coupled cells by using, again, k as bifurcation para-
meter. This scheme is valid for all metabolites, since the type
of the dynamical behaviour, i.e. whether it is a steady-state or an
oscillatory state, is the same for all variables for any given value
of k. Figure 3 demonstrates the rich repertoire of dynamics for
the given system. It provides the correct picture concerning the
succession of the bifurcations with respect to parameter k. The
amplitudes of the variable were plotted in such a way that the
most simple arrangement was obtained. Details of the original
bifurcation diagram are shown for the variable A3 in Figures 4
and 5.

<a id='fb3bdb29-f2aa-49e1-8ed0-ec604ecac8a3'></a>

The steady state (straight line) in Figure 3 is stable for k< k(Hsyn) (continuous line) and unstable otherwise (broken line).

<a id='11b1f3e1-6e15-4e1f-9313-5de8096d13ab'></a>

The stability changes via a Hopf bifurcation, resulting from the factor F($\lambda$), such that k(H$_{syn}$) has the same value as k$_H$ of the single cell. In the two-cell model a second Hopf bifurcation results from the factor D($\lambda$), and occurs at k(H$_{asyn}$) on the unstable branch of the symmetric steady state. Both Hopf bifurcations are subcritical, and the two curves originating from the corresponding points represent amplitudes of unstable limit cycles. At decreasing k values, both limit cycles become stable at L$_{syn}$ and L$_{asyn}$ respectively, leading either to synchronous oscillations (phase shift $\tau$ = 0 between the cells) on branch b1 or to regular asynchronous oscillations ($\tau$ = T/2) on branch b2. In both cases, the cells oscillate with identical amplitudes. Branches b1 and b2 become unstable at the symmetry breaking bifurcation points B1 and B2 respectively. Figures 6(A) and 6(B) show an example of regular asynchronous oscillations corresponding to branch b2 for the concentration of ATP. In a region where the synchronous and the regular asynchronous oscillations are unstable, a stable branch b4 exists on which the two coupled cells oscillate with slightly different amplitudes and with a phase shift 0 < $\tau$ < T/2 (non-regular asynchronous oscillations; for an example, see Figures 7A and 7B). Beyond B3 the only stable states are synchronous oscillations.

<a id='9a1ddfed-ce27-4330-a860-4cab1a89bb21'></a>

In addition to branch b4, there exists a second branch connecting the synchronous and the regular asynchronous oscil-lations. This branch (b5) originates in B1, and also represents non-regular asynchronous oscillations. In contrast with b4, branch b5 has a stable and an unstable part. Another higher bifurcation in B5 leads, via an unstable part, to the stable branch b6 at k(Lₖ). As found for b4, the amplitudes of the oscillations on the branches b5 and b6 are different for the two cells. In contrast

<a id='c02e4eaa-4b8a-4ab8-b15e-ae3587b15339'></a>

<::This is a bifurcation diagram showing a 'variable' on the y-axis against a 'bifurcation parameter k' on the x-axis. The diagram illustrates multiple branches of steady states, distinguished by their stability: solid lines represent stable steady states, and dotted/dashed lines represent unstable steady states. Key features and labels include: a horizontal solid line labeled "stable steady state" and a horizontal dotted line labeled "unstable steady state". Several curves and branches are labeled b1, b2, b3, b4, b5, b6, and B1, B2, B3, B4, B5. Specific points or regions are marked Lk, Lsyn, Hsyn, and Hasyn. The diagram shows complex dynamics with multiple coexisting stable and unstable states, and various bifurcation events, with the upper and lower halves appearing largely symmetrical.: bifurcation diagram::>

<a id='9c5996c1-94ef-4910-9172-bf46af35f300'></a>

Figure 3 Schematic bifurcation diagram for two coupled cells
Continuous and broken lines represent, respectively, stable or unstable stationary or oscillatory states for the system variables at different values of the bifurcation parameter k. Hsyn and Hasyn denote subcritical Hopf bifurcations. At Lsyn, Lasyn and Lk saddle-node bifurcations of limit cycles occur. Branches b1–b6 represent the amplitudes (maxima and minima) of stable limit cycles. On b1, b2 and b3, the amplitudes of the given compound are identical in the two cells. On branches b4, b5 and b6, the cellular metabolites differ in their amplitudes. Branch b6 is characterized by high amplitudes in one cell and low amplitudes in the other cell. Points B1 to B5 represent symmetry breaking bifurcation points of higher order.

<a id='ffb59620-39da-426b-8512-62f6e26d087b'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='5f2f0f6e-9c53-4058-a958-973c46af64b6'></a>

326

<a id='bb77464f-967d-4d30-a30a-fee7ddf3a0d6'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='e4bb9cd0-511e-48c6-93cf-f99f5f93d95f'></a>

<::transcription of the content: chart::>
### Figure 4 Bifurcation diagram for the ATP concentrations A³¹ and A³² for high values of the bifurcation parameter k

**Chart Description:**

A 2D plot showing a bifurcation diagram with k (min⁻¹) on the x-axis, ranging from 2 to 4, and A₃ (mM) on the y-axis, ranging from 3 to 3.25.

There are two main curves plotted:
1.  **Upper curve (filled circles):** Labeled A³¹, extending from approximately (2, 3.26) to (4, 3.06).
2.  **Lower curve (open circles):** Labeled A³², extending from approximately (2, 3.26) to (4, 3.06).

Several specific branches and points are marked:
-   **b2:** A segment of the upper curve near (2.4, 3.24).
-   **B2:** A point on the lower curve near (2.3, 3.2).
-   **b4:** A thick black curve segment that connects from the upper curve (A³¹) to the lower curve (A³²), forming a loop. This segment is below the main curves, roughly between k values of 2.4 and 3.8.
-   **B3:** A point on the lower curve near (3.75, 3.09).
-   **b3:** A segment of the lower curve near (3.8, 3.08).

Equations are shown:
-   A³¹(t) = A³²(t + T/2) near the top left of the plot.
-   A³¹(t) = A³²(t) near the bottom right of the plot.

The diagram shows parts of branches b2, b3 and b4 introduced schematically in Figure 3.
<::>

<a id='0a6805c7-3301-4b2b-95ec-74f3620b64ac'></a>

<::transcription of the content: bifurcation diagram::>Figure 5 Bifurcation diagram for the ATP concentrations A₃¹ and A₃² for low values of the bifurcation parameter k. The diagram shows parts of branches b1, b2 and b5 introduced schematically in Figure 3. Despite the fact that the stable branch b5 and its unstable continuation look more complicated in this original calculation than in the schematic picture, their topological structures do not differ. Branches b1 and b2 become stable slightly behind the bifurcation points Lsyn and Lasyn respectively, a detail which is not shown in Figure 3. The x-axis is labeled k (min⁻¹) and ranges from 0.48 to 0.6. The y-axis is labeled A₃ (mM) and ranges from 3.64 to 3.72. The diagram displays several curves with points. A curve labeled b1 starts near Lsyn. Another curve labeled b2 is present. A complex, looped curve is labeled b5, with parts labeled B1, A₃¹, and A₃². Points Lsyn and Lasyn are marked. Some curves are represented by filled circles, others by open circles. Equations A₃¹(t) = A₃²(t) and A₃¹(t) = A₃²(t + T/2) are also indicated near specific curves.<::

<a id='a2a3138e-f916-405f-bd6a-97e9666b62f9'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='a5a81422-4e30-4510-9f5b-94f3dd19f95c'></a>

Intercellular coupling of glycolytic oscillations

<a id='c8a2e5df-630a-44db-a453-8c40efcdae78'></a>

327

<a id='8bddcb6c-f07f-4b69-965f-71a1e7441e90'></a>

<::chart: Two plots, labeled A and B, illustrating the regular asynchronous oscillation of ATP concentrations in two interacting cells.::>Figure 6 Regular asynchronous oscillation of the ATP concentrations A³ and A³ in two interacting cells corresponding to branch b2 of Figure 3 for k = 1.5 min⁻¹; other parameters are as given in Table 1. The amplitudes are identical for both cells (ΔA³ = ΔA³ = 3.29 mM) and the phase shift is τ = T/2 with T = 1.39 min. (A) temporal development; (B) phase plane representation. <::chart: (A) A line chart showing the temporal development of ATP concentrations. The x-axis is labeled "Time (min)" and ranges from 0 to 3. The y-axis is labeled "A₃ (mM)" and ranges from 0 to 4. Two oscillating curves are plotted, labeled A₃¹ and A₃², representing the ATP concentrations in two cells. Both curves show regular asynchronous oscillations between approximately 0.1 mM and 3.3 mM. (B) A phase plane representation. The x-axis is labeled "A₃¹ (mM)" and ranges from 0 to 4. The y-axis is labeled "A₃² (mM)" and ranges from 0 to 4. A closed loop (limit cycle) is depicted, illustrating the relationship between the concentrations A₃¹ and A₃² over time.::>

<a id='c215943a-bf05-4365-958e-68867c35b5f5'></a>

with the oscillations in Figure 7 (branch b4), where the amplitudes of the two cells differ only slightly, the oscillations of branch b6 shown in Figures 8(A) and 8(B) are characterized by high amplitudes in one cell and very low amplitudes in the other cell.

<a id='15453c38-393c-4c15-9b93-472c5578b7c5'></a>

Figure 3 reveals that there exist parameter regions where different stable oscillatory modes may be reached, depending on the initial conditions. The simultaneous existence of the stable parts of branches b1 and b6 at low k values indicates the occurrence of bi-rhythmicity in the present model. At higher k values (beyond the bifurcation L$_{asyn}$) there exists even a 'tri-rhythmicity' of a synchronous oscillation and two different kinds of asynchronous oscillations, or, alternatively (beyond B1), of three types of asynchronous behaviour.

<a id='cdaf6da0-874c-463f-a002-7ee2508a1a04'></a>

Figures 4 and 5 give detailed results for branches b4 and b5,
and for the maxima of the oscillations for the variable A3. Branch
b4 shown in Figure 4 consists of an upper part, representing the
maxima of the amplitudes of A3 in cell 1, and a lower part for A3
in cell 2, such that the variations of ATP in cell 1 are more
pronounced than in cell 2. The phase shift between the two cells
decreases continuously at increasing values of k from τ = T/2 to

<a id='13f15996-b270-4cb7-bf01-496b63480428'></a>

<::chart: The visual content consists of two plots, labeled A and B, which illustrate non-regular asynchronous oscillations of ATP concentrations in two coupled cells. Plot A is a time series graph with 'A_3 (mM)' on the y-axis (ranging from 0 to 4) and 'Time (min)' on the x-axis (ranging from 0 to 3). It shows two distinct, non-regular, and asynchronous oscillating curves, labeled A_3^1 and A_3^2, representing the ATP concentrations. Plot B is a phase-space plot with 'A_3^2 (mM)' on the y-axis (ranging from 0 to 4) and 'A_3^1 (mM)' on the x-axis (ranging from 0 to 4). This plot displays two limit cycles: 'LC 1' is represented by a solid line, and 'LC 2' is represented by a dashed line. Figure 7 Non-regular asynchronous oscillations of the ATP concentrations A_3^1 and A_3^2 in two coupled cells corresponding to branch b4 of Figure 3 for k = 2.5 min^-1; other parameters are as given in Table 1::>

<a id='24e26637-d13d-4b73-b559-f5f53ddd3b05'></a>

The amplitudes are non-identical (ΔA³₁ = 3.11 mM, ΔA³₂ = 3.14 mM). Period of the oscillation:
T = 1.30 min; phase shift between the cells τ = 0.34 min ≠ T/2. (A) temporal development;
(B) phase plane representation. The solid curve LC1 in (B) represents the limit cycle
corresponding to the oscillation shown in (A); the broken curve is a second limit cycle LC2,
which occurs for reasons of symmetry.

<a id='82586970-6ce8-42a8-af29-346cad5f34e1'></a>

τ = 0, which is in line with the fact that b4 connects regular asynchronous and synchronous oscillations. Because of the symmetry, branch b4 also represents a second stable limit cycle, where the roles of cell 1 and cell 2 are exchanged.

<a id='9208842d-f1a9-4aa2-b146-0320c036af76'></a>

Figure 5 shows branches b1 and b5 in detail, as well as a part of b2. The branch b5 originates from the stable branch b1 at the point B1 by a supercritical bifurcation. The unstable continuation of b5 leads to bifurcation point B4, which is located on the unstable branch of regular asynchronous oscillations.

<a id='5aabf3ac-9141-4c6b-b868-072842c4f565'></a>

The main bifurcations H$_{syn}$, H$_{asyn}$, L$_{syn}$, L$_{asyn}$ and L$_k$ explained above are represented in Figure 9, where, in addition to k, the parameter J$_0$ is varied. For n = 1, the lines H$_{asyn}$, L$_{asyn}$ and L$_k$ do not exist, whereas the lines H$_{syn}$ and L$_{syn}$ are independent of the number of cells. These bifurcation lines divide the (k, J$_0$)-plane into different regions. In the region left of the lines L$_{syn}$, L$_{asyn}$, or L$_k$, the system will always approach a stable steady state. In the grey-shaded region on the right of H$_{syn}$, the stationary state is

<a id='a5a39019-5055-4942-8908-9d8187bfba9a'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='151eeb56-ea63-4d0c-b544-997e5da93b94'></a>

328

<a id='a1ce7188-ebc4-4488-bdd3-94ac279b7609'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='7eb92650-a1ff-40a3-911d-c05fe3141c3d'></a>

<::chart: Panel A: Time series plot showing non-regular asynchronous oscillations of ATP concentrations. X-axis: Time (min). Y-axis: A₃ (mM). Two curves are plotted: A₃¹ and A₃². The A₃¹ curve shows oscillations with peaks around 3.5 mM and troughs near 0 mM, occurring approximately every 1.5 minutes. The A₃² curve shows oscillations with peaks around 2.75 mM and troughs near 2.7 mM, maintaining a relatively stable level compared to A₃¹. Panel B: Phase plot showing limit cycles of ATP concentrations. X-axis: A₃¹ (mM). Y-axis: A₃² (mM). Two distinct regions are shown: LC 1: A horizontal line around A₃² = 2.75 mM, with vertical segments at A₃¹ values around 2.5 mM and 3.5 mM. LC 2: A vertical line around A₃¹ = 2.75 mM, with horizontal segments at A₃² values around 1 mM and 3.5 mM. Inset plot: A zoomed-in view showing a closed loop (limit cycle) in the A₃¹-A₃² phase space, with the inset X-axis ranging from 0 to 4 and the inset Y-axis ranging from 2.65 to 2.75. Figure 8 Non-regular asynchronous oscillations of the ATP concentrations A₃¹ and A₃² in two interacting cells corresponding to branch b6 of Figure 3 for k = 0.7 min⁻¹; other parameters are as given in Table 1::>

<a id='2b4f132d-1b7e-4e0a-8a80-f44b28a03a46'></a>

The amplitudes differ greatly (ΔA¹₁ = 3.52 mM, ΔA¹₂ = 0.08 mM). The period of the oscillation T = 1.55 min; phase shift between the maxima of the oscillations τ = 0.20 min ≠ T/2. (A) temporal development; (B) phase plane representation. Limit cycle LC1 corresponds to the oscillation shown in (A); a second limit cycle LC2 occurs for reasons of symmetry. Inset: detailed phase plane representation of LC1.

<a id='0ab1c2c8-1b35-4692-8701-8a5b62db7f8e'></a>

unstable and the system will tend towards one of the limit cycles representing synchronous, regular asynchronous or non-regular asynchronous oscillations. In the region left of H<sub>syn</sub> and right of the other bifurcation lines, the system reaches eventually the stable steady state or one of the possible limit cycles. The thin straight line corresponds to the parameter variation performed for the bifurcation analysis in Figures 3–5. From Figure 9 it becomes clear that, for higher values of J<sub>0</sub>, the sequence of the bifurcations L<sub>syn</sub>, L<sub>asyn</sub> and L<sub>k</sub> differs from that described above for J<sub>0</sub> = 3.0 mM·min<sup>-1</sup>.

<a id='b1c48301-476b-481e-a06d-4718876507cf'></a>

The diagram presented in Figure 9 shows some agreement with experimental data. (1) As shown in [19], there is a lower limit in the degradation rate of the coupling substance in the external medium (characterized by the parameter k) for the induction of glycolytic oscillations in yeast cell populations. This is in agreement with our theoretical result that, for low k values, only stable steady states exist. (2) Glycolytic oscillations are observed in

<a id='4bcd7c5b-94f6-4c79-9d79-67358fd25648'></a>

extracts and suspensions of yeast cells only in a limited range of the input flux of glucose (represented in the model by J₀). Below a critical value J₀, as well as for high values of the influx, no limit cycle oscillations are possible in experiments, a result which is clearly reflected by the diagram given in Figure 9.

<a id='d50a5f49-d2e6-44d1-a0cb-c8e1d038ef7f'></a>

The analysis may be extended further by the consideration of other bifurcation parameters. In accordance with the experimental data, there exists in our model an upper limit of the cell density φ for the occurrence of oscillations (results not shown). There is no bifurcation line giving a lower limit of that parameter for the occurrence of oscillations. However, the time to synchronize the population becomes greatly lengthened at low densities, which may explain why no oscillations are observed under these circumstances in the experiments [18].

<a id='76430008-7eba-45dc-a47b-7484a427f831'></a>

## CELL POPULATIONS

The Hopf bifurcations leading to synchronous and asynchronous limit cycles are independent of the number _n_ of interacting cells (see Appendix B). Moreover, numerical investigations show that these bifurcations are subcritical, not only for _n_ = 2 (H<sub>syn</sub> and H<sub>asyn</sub> in Figures 3 and 9), but also for higher numbers. Saddle-node bifurcations of limit cycles (L<sub>k</sub>, L<sub>syn</sub> and L<sub>asyn</sub> in Figures 3 and 9) exist also for _n_ > 2. These similarities in the bifurcations of systems with different cell numbers lead to the general occurrence of synchronous oscillations, regular asynchronous oscillations and non-regular asynchronous oscillations. In the regular asynchronous state all cells oscillate in an identical way, but with fixed phase shifts, which are multiples of τ = _T_/_n_. Accordingly, the external concentration of the coupling substance shows oscillations, the amplitudes of which are significantly smaller compared with the synchronous state.

<a id='2719704c-1fac-409d-80aa-c38140caa354'></a>

**Phase response after addition of acetaldehyde**

An appropriate way to investigate the effect of a substance on an oscillating system is by perturbation experiments. Experimentally, this was investigated for pulses of acetaldehyde given to the external medium of a yeast suspension [13,14]. This choice was encouraged by the idea that a metabolite which couples the individual cells should be able to affect the intracellular oscillatory dynamics. Acetaldehyde was found to induce phase shifts, depending on the initial change of the acetaldehyde concentration, as well as on the phase where the perturbation is applied.

<a id='f18603e2-b657-4de8-abbb-cac4037b8fce'></a>

According to the experimental situation the phase response ΔΨ of NADH was investigated. Perturbations were applied to a suspension of synchronized cells at different phases Φ within one period. The angles are measured in such a way that Φ = 90° indicates that the pulse of acetaldehyde is applied when the NADH concentration attains its maximum, corresponding to the choice of the co-ordinate system used in experimental studies [13].

<a id='c6a366bd-6675-47d8-961a-302597755b17'></a>

Figure 10 shows an example of the time course of acetaldehyde and NADH, where a pulse of 0.2 mM acetaldehyde is applied shortly after the maximum of NADH (Φ = 110°). The simulation was performed for J₀ = 2.5 mM·min⁻¹, k = 1.8 min⁻¹, with reference values for all other parameters (for this combination of parameter values, only the synchronous oscillation was a stable solution). Before the pulse, the NADH concentration oscillated between 0.08 and 0.2 mM, and the external concentration of acetaldehyde was in the range 0.05 to 0.1 mM with a period of T = 1.17 min. After the pulse, the first maximum occurred after a period T = 1.25 min, which corresponded to a phase shift ΔΨ₁ =

<a id='37619f52-4ad0-4b91-91a0-5c6129200fe7'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='c2327d2c-1ec8-4803-b2b4-85dde6b123c8'></a>

Intercellular coupling of glycolytic oscillations

<a id='0b955c2e-325c-43f5-b141-6d23b316bc85'></a>

329

<a id='b23e46a8-f0de-44dd-bc0d-d80f0dd4765a'></a>

<::transcription of the content: chart::>Figure 9 Bifurcation lines in the parameter plane (k, J₀) Whereas Hsyn and Hasyn denote Hopf bifurcation lines; Lsyn, Lasyn and Lk give the points of saddle-node bifurcations. The thin straight line corresponds to the parameter variation performed for the bifurcation analysis in Figures 1–3. In the region left of the lines Lsyn, Lasyn and Lk, only steady states are stable, whereas in the grey shaded region the system always reaches one of the stable limit cycles. In the region in between the system tends eventually towards the stable steady state or one of the possible limit cycles. The chart displays a 2D plot with k (min⁻¹) on the x-axis ranging from 0 to 4, and J₀ (mM·min⁻¹) on the y-axis ranging from 2 to 5. Several lines are plotted: Lsyn, Lasyn, and Lk are solid lines forming a shape that opens to the right. Hsyn and Hasyn are dashed lines, enclosing a grey shaded region to the right of the L-lines. There is also a thin horizontal line at J₀ = 3. The L-lines and H-lines are labeled within the plot area.::>

<a id='7e931d82-43e4-493b-a329-b9381f03d043'></a>

<::chart: A line graph titled "Time course of external acetaldehyde (thin line) and NADH (thicker line) before and after a pulse of 0.2 mM acetaldehyde to the extracellular solution". The x-axis is labeled "Time (min)" and ranges from 0 to 8. The y-axis is labeled "N₂, S₄ᵉˣ (mM)" and ranges from 0 to 0.3. Two lines are plotted: a thin line representing external acetaldehyde and a thicker line representing NADH. Both lines show oscillatory behavior. A vertical line at approximately t = 2.96 min indicates the perturbation point. Before the perturbation, both lines oscillate with a period annotated as T=1.17. At the perturbation, the thin line (external acetaldehyde) shows a sharp increase to a peak of about 0.27 mM, then decreases rapidly before resuming oscillations with a slightly smaller amplitude. The thicker line (NADH) shows a dip at the perturbation, then resumes oscillations with a slightly larger amplitude. After the perturbation, the oscillations are annotated with T=1.25. The caption is: Figure 10 Time course of external acetaldehyde (thin line) and NADH (thicker line) before and after a pulse of 0.2 mM acetaldehyde to the extracellular solution. Parameters: J₀ = 2.5 mM · min⁻¹; k = 1.8 min⁻¹; reference values for all other parameters. The perturbation is applied at t = 2.96 min, which corresponds to Φ = 110° (cf. Figure 11).::>

<a id='d837659d-aa22-49c1-9bb5-d5100187b97d'></a>

25.0°. A careful inspection of the time course showed that there was an increase in the phase shift of the following maxima, such that ΔΨ → 46.9° for very long time periods. Moreover, the addition of acetaldehyde led to a lowering of the first NADH minimum, which was a typical response in experiments [14].

<a id='5d88669a-f834-48b8-ac9e-3e25e48a4a99'></a>

<::chart::>Figure 11 Phase response ΔΨ of NADH after addition of a pulse of 0.2 mM acetaldehyde at different Φ values. The chart displays two curves, labeled A and B, plotting ΔΨ (°) on the y-axis against Φ (°) on the x-axis. The x-axis ranges from 0 to 360 degrees, with major ticks every 90 degrees. The y-axis ranges from -5 to 70 degrees, with major ticks every 10 degrees. Curve A (top curve) starts at approximately 54°, decreases to a minimum of about 46° at around 70°, and then generally increases with some fluctuations, ending around 58° at 360°. Curve B (bottom curve) starts at approximately 23°, decreases to a minimum of about -2° at around 85°, then shows a sharp discontinuous jump (indicated by a dashed line) to approximately 24° at around 95°. After this jump, curve B generally increases with some fluctuations, ending around 23° at 360°. A vertical line is drawn at Φ = 90°. Parameters: J₀ = 2.5 mM·min⁻¹; k = 1.8 min⁻¹; reference values for all other parameters. Curve A shows the phase shift after a long time, when the system has returned to the limit cycle; curve B illustrates the phase shift of the first maximum after the perturbation.<::>

<a id='121d8253-c571-4294-889c-fb129e159d9d'></a>

In Figure 11, the phase response ΔΨ of NADH after addition of a pulse of 0.2 mM acetaldehyde at different Φ values is shown. Curve A refers to the phase shift (ΔΨ∞) after a long time where the system is returned to the limit cycle, whereas curve B represents the phase shift (ΔΨ₁) of the first maximum after the

<a id='2d4f29bd-afe9-4bd9-ac20-d92ebd178c83'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='9c576c4a-898c-47e4-9efb-c39cef2c4765'></a>

330

<a id='3ecfb660-bbd0-4b75-b6d5-94e8e81ea027'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='3c2986bf-fea6-448a-a654-5fd0443a656a'></a>

<::Figure showing two plots, A and B. Plot A displays N_2 (mM) on the y-axis against Time (min) on the x-axis, ranging from 0 to 2 min. Two oscillating curves are present, labeled N_2^I and N_2^{II}, showing an inverse relationship in their peaks and troughs. The y-axis ranges from 0.05 to 0.25 mM. Plot B displays 1/2(N_2^I + N_2^{II}) on the y-axis (same scale as N_2) against ln(Time) on the x-axis, ranging from 1 to 6. This plot shows an oscillating signal that initially has a small amplitude and then dramatically increases in amplitude and mean value as ln(Time) increases.: chart::>

<a id='b1454d9f-91b3-49a8-af37-cb8bf86267e0'></a>

Figure 12 Mixing of two subpopulations
(A) Concentrations of NADH in two subpopulations, I and II, oscillating 180° out of phase. (B) The mean NADH concentration after mixing of the two subpopulations. The time is shown on a logarithmic scale. Parameters: J₀ = 2.5 mM·min⁻¹; k = 1.8 min⁻¹; reference values for all other parameters.

<a id='bf3cdbfd-3378-40b5-ae4d-59c15ec62e4f'></a>

Table 3 Control coefficients of the synchronization time for the coupling
parameter κ and the combined effect of all other processes
The coefficients were calculated by numerical evaluation of the integrals which enter definition
(6) and by analysing the mean effect of an increase and a decrease of the parameters around
a reference state by a certain percentage. For the reference set of parameters and with J₀ =
2.5 mM·min⁻¹ and k = 1.8 min⁻¹, the mean synchronization time is τ_syn = 99.10 min.
<table id="9-1">
<tr><td id="9-2">Δp/p</td><td id="9-3">0.01</td><td id="9-4">0.05</td><td id="9-5">0.10</td><td id="9-6">0.30</td></tr>
<tr><td id="9-7">Cᵀₖˢʸⁿ</td><td id="9-8">–0.08</td><td id="9-9">–0.07</td><td id="9-a">–0.08</td><td id="9-b">–0.11</td></tr>
<tr><td id="9-c">Σ Cᵀₚᵢˢʸⁿ pⱼ≠κ</td><td id="9-d">–0.92</td><td id="9-e">–0.93</td><td id="9-f">–0.94</td><td id="9-g">–1.07</td></tr>
<tr><td id="9-h">Σ Cᵀₚˢʸⁿ p</td><td id="9-i">–1.00</td><td id="9-j">–1.00</td><td id="9-k">–1.02</td><td id="9-l">–1.18</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='9b7af937-f525-4d24-b64c-a3b05b6bccdc'></a>

perturbation. Both curves are non-monotonous and have some similarities, i.e. both have maxima for Φ ≈ 230° and Φ ≈ 350°. The values of ΔΨ∞ are ubiquitously larger than ΔΨ₁, indicating that the system does not return to the limit cycle after one period for the given perturbation. In the region Φ = 0° to Φ = 90°, the shape of curve B differs substantially from that of curve A. In particular, ΔΨ₁ decreases initially in a much more pronounced manner than ΔΨ∞ at increasing Φ. The curve B has a discontinuity at Φ = 90°, where ΔΨ₁ jumps from about −3° to values of about 23°. This effect may be explained as follows: in the region Φ = 0° to Φ = 90° of curve B, the NADH concentration increases further after the addition of acetaldehyde, which gives rise to a maximum that follows rather quickly after

<a id='5e029052-5371-4e45-9ddd-0b9bf2317706'></a>

the perturbation. However, beyond Φ = 90° the addition of
acetaldehyde is followed by an immediate decrease in the NADH
concentration, leading to a delayed occurrence of the next
maximum. It is interesting to note that the addition of acet-
aldehyde immediately before the NADH maximum leads to a
phase advance with respect to ΔΨ₁, but this characteristic
vanishes if one considers the phase shift after a long time.

<a id='f7ddef46-0658-4d4a-a615-b929ade73b8f'></a>

The phase-response curves depicted in Figure 11 show some agreement with experimental data [13], where the first maximum after a pulse was analysed. For example, ΔΨ₁ᵉˣᵖ also decreased in the range 0° < Φ < 90°, and increased for 90° < Φ < 360°. In the latter region the theoretical value of ΔΨ₁ increased for 90° < Φ < 230°, but decreased thereafter and showed a second maximum at Φ ≈ 350°. This very detailed feature of the response could not be seen in experiments which included only a few data points. The absolute values of the phase shifts observed in the experiments are generally higher than those of the model. Moreover, the experimental data indicate that phase shifts are negative in a larger region of Φ than found for curve ΔΨ₁ in Figure 11.

<a id='e6407c5d-f84e-4a22-9afa-2b0d2841cc86'></a>

**Mixing of two subpopulations**
In order to study the interaction of oscillating cells, simulations were performed where two cell populations I and II are mixed, which are synchronized internally, but oscillate 180° out of phase before mixing. This corresponds to experimental investigations carried out for yeast cells, which show that a rather rapid synchronization occurs after a time which corresponds to 1–2 cycles [11,12] or about 8 cycles [13] of the original limit cycle.
Our model may explain a synchronization of the two sub-

<a id='a53fe1c5-3cf6-421b-8623-07b314ee878b'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='8010c9bd-5e80-4523-a4fa-56c8249242d2'></a>

Intercellular coupling of glycolytic oscillations

<a id='17f07962-6849-4b26-828c-4bb0f4a0a68e'></a>

331

<a id='89b351c6-63d3-4e15-a849-bf659b39f3cf'></a>

populations via the exchange of acetaldehyde. Figures 12(A) and 12(B) show the simulated concentrations of NADH of two subpopulations before mixing, and the mean NADH concen- tration after mixing. Immediately after mixing the amplitudes of the mean NADH concentration are strongly damped by a factor of about 5. In the following time course, the amplitudes increase monotonically towards values observed in the two sub- populations before mixing. However, the synchronization time corresponds to about 140 cycles, and it is therefore much longer than in the experiment (please note the logarithmic time scale in Figure 12B). Increasing the coupling parameter & by a factor of about 100, which strengthens the intercellular communication via transmembrane fluxes of acetaldehyde, decreases the synchronization time only by a factor of about 3. This leads to the conclusion that other processes within this model play a strong role in the limitation of this time (see below).

<a id='39813044-132b-41c9-b2ef-e8243d0063c3'></a>

For a quantitative analysis of the effects of parameters on
the synchronization we define a mean synchronization time
in the following way:

<a id='3d1bb6ba-957f-4616-b9fd-1b6a4dbca84f'></a>

τ_syn = ( ∫_{t_mix}^{∞} (t - t_mix) ⋅ |N_2^I - N_2^{II}| dt ) / ( ∫_{t_mix}^{∞} |N_2^I - N_2^{II}| dt ) (6)

<a id='b684f26d-9c7a-46fe-89d6-51b06cf8303b'></a>

where N₁ᴵ and N₂ᴵᴵ denote the concentrations of NADH in the two subpopulations. According to this formula, the mean synchronization time results from a weighting of t-t_mix, i.e. the times elapsed after mixing, by the differences of the NADH concentrations between the two populations (for general definitions of mean transition times, cf. [20,21]). Variations in the parameters will affect the time courses of N₁ᴵ and N₂ᴵᴵ and in this way the synchronization time.

<a id='66074d99-db43-48ce-961f-254b014af679'></a>

A convenient measure for the parameter dependence of the synchronization time is

<a id='cff4d197-5f6e-44dd-a52d-9682c3ed4d60'></a>

C^\tau_p = \frac{\Delta\tau_{syn} / \tau_{syn}}{\Delta p / p} (7)

<a id='4f58a61b-2ded-4a69-a2c8-cd5f24103a86'></a>

where p may represent any system parameter. This corresponds
to definitions of control coefficients in metabolic control analysis,
which have been applied to fluxes and concentrations under
steady-state conditions [22], as well as for frequencies and
amplitudes of oscillations [23,24]. Our analysis was confined to
those parameters pi that contain the unit of time in the form
min⁻¹ (see the first nine parameters listed in Table 1). For
infinitesimal changes in the parameters, one may derive the
summed control of all rates over the mean synchronization time,
i.e. the summation relationship, as follows:

<a id='189be5ad-9979-400d-a658-a709f493d252'></a>

$\sum_{i} C^{{\tau}_{syn}}_{p_i} = \sum_{i} \frac{p_i}{\tau_{syn}} \frac{\partial \tau_{syn}}{\partial p_i} = -1 \quad (8)$

<a id='8e3b968f-36fb-4904-8ddd-6c32761528f3'></a>

Table 3 gives the results of numerical calculations for the control
coefficient C<sup>τsyn</sup><sub>κ</sub> (characterizing the change of τ<sub>syn</sub> at variations of
the coupling flux J), and for the sum of control coefficients of all
other processes. This was done for different small but finite
changes of the corresponding parameters. It is seen that an
increase in κ leads to a decrease in the synchronization time (C<sup>τsyn</sup><sub>κ</sub>
< 0). This corresponds to the expectations concerning the role of
the coupling flux in the communication between the two cell
populations. Surprisingly, the effect of the coupling parameter κ
is rather small, although this parameter determines the velocity
of the exchange of acetaldehyde. According to Table 3, the
synchronization time is limited mainly by the combined effect of
all the other processes. This means that a simultaneous increase

<a id='008d7f13-efc8-492f-9108-380fd2e25688'></a>

**Table 4 Control coefficients of the synchronization time for those parameter p, which have the combined effect listed in Table 3**

The parameters were changed by 1%. The sum $\sum_{p_i \neq \kappa} C_{p_i}^{T^{syn}}$ results to $-0.90$, whereas it is $-0.92$ in Table 3.

<table id="10-1">
<tr><td id="10-2">Parameter</td><td id="10-3">Cᵀₚ,syn</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-4">f</td><td id="10-5">+7.98</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-6">k₁</td><td id="10-7">-1.68</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-8">k₂</td><td id="10-9">-7.72</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-a">k₃</td><td id="10-b">-2.30</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-c">k₄</td><td id="10-d">-0.02</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-e">k₅</td><td id="10-f">+3.61</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-g">k₆</td><td id="10-h">-0.48</td></tr>
<tr><td id="10-i">k</td><td id="10-j">-0.29</td></tr>
</table>

<a id='5a69791d-0d8d-465e-ba2d-d365a6ec79b5'></a>

in their rate constants by the same factor leads to an almost
proportional decrease in τ_syn. For Δp/p ≤ 0.1, the summation
relationship (eqn. 8) holds true up to the second decimal place.
Even for a 30 % change of the parameters, the sum deviates only
slightly from minus unity.

<a id='add40380-d791-4907-b485-c231dfed4b32'></a>

Calculation of the individual coefficients that have been lumped in Table 3 reveals a very heterogeneous picture concerning the role of the input flux of glucose, and of the intracellular processes in the control of the synchronization time (Table 4). Whereas the combined effect of all parameters is negative, two of the individual control coefficients (C<sup>τsyn</sup><sub>J0</sub> and C<sup>τsyn</sup><sub>k5</sub>) are positive, indicating a prolonged synchronization with a higher influx or an increased rate of the non-glycolytic ATP consumption. Two coefficients are very large in their absolute amounts, but are of opposite sign. This concerns the parameters J<sub>0</sub> and k<sub>2</sub>, which have a positive and a negative control coefficient respectively. The coefficient of PFK (reaction 1) is comparatively small, although this enzyme plays a major role in generating the oscillations. Generally, one may conclude that, for synchronization and for generation of oscillations, different processes may be important.

<a id='720459d5-a517-4cee-9062-47757db4cb66'></a>

It is difficult to give an intuitive interpretation of the coefficients listed in Table 4, owing to the complexity of the parameter dependence of the non-linear dynamics of two interacting oscillatory systems. The question arises whether there is a relation between the change of the synchronization time and the variation of other global system properties, such as the oscillation period or the mean transmembrane fluxes of the coupling substance. However, a comparison of the effects of parameter changes on the oscillatory period in the model for a single synchronized population showed no direct correlation to the parameter dependence of the mean synchronization time. For example, an increase in J strongly increases the period, whereas an activation of reaction 2 leaves the period nearly unchanged (results not shown).

<a id='c33fac2d-08d7-4c71-b6df-7cfb71299d8e'></a>

One would expect that the control coefficient of the transmembrane exchange of the coupling substance would be higher for smaller values of κ. However, in the present case the range of possible values of κ is limited due to a vanishing of the oscillations for κ < 3.2 min⁻¹.

<a id='577cbd61-063d-4221-bdeb-c0bad7ddb114'></a>

These results indicate that the proposed synchronization mechanism via acetaldehyde diffusion might not be sufficient to explain the rapid synchronization found in the experiment. In fact, acetaldehyde affects the PFK oscillator only in an indirect way (see Scheme 1). A change in external acetaldehyde will first influence the alcohol dehydrogenase reaction ($v_4$) and, in this way, the redox state of the cell. This effect is transduced via

<a id='d77051a1-3162-4b64-8aa8-260b2a5c90c9'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='4a3e616e-4dfb-4d63-a8e2-2b977d7154cd'></a>

332

<a id='0fdba076-7335-4711-8e56-02b7ad7ee3e2'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='5b7d8e07-d77d-4b59-a706-173cfd3d072e'></a>

reactions 2 and 3 to the concentrations of the adenine nucleotides, which, in turn, modify the PFK reaction. One might expect that the synchronization via acetaldehyde, which affects primarily the lower part of the reaction chain, could be accelerated by introducing regulatory couplings to the upper part of the pathway. This may be one of the many effectors of PFK. Alternative explanations of the rapid synchronization observed in the experiment could be the oscillation of a parameter that modifies the activity of all enzymes, such as pH, or an intercellular communication not only via acetaldehyde, but by a trans- membrane exchange of other intermediates.

<a id='c9fe0f98-9a74-4dea-ac32-8bd1b47aeb1d'></a>

## DISCUSSION
The investigation of metabolic oscillations in yeast cells has a long tradition concerning glycolytic oscillations with a short period of about 1 min under anaerobic conditions [25,26]. More recently, slower oscillations with a period of about 1 h under aerobic conditions [27,28] have been found. The present study is the first investigation of the interaction of anaerobic, oscillating cells on the basis of a rather detailed description of glycolysis.

<a id='82b8a4e9-144d-44f0-8846-df1dcd0fcd96'></a>

A thorough bifurcation analysis of the underlying model combined with numerical simulations shows that, in this multi-variate system, a great variety of dynamical modes exists. Depending on the parameter values, stable steady states, synchronized oscillations, regular asynchronous oscillations and non-regular asynchronous oscillations may occur. In certain parameter regions, the system also displays chaotic behaviour, which we have not studied in detail. Though the model includes many reactions and, therefore, a rather high number of system parameters, only a small number of these parameters have been varied in the bifurcation analysis. These are the input rate of glucose ($J_0$), the cell density ($\varphi$) and the rate constant of the external degradation of the coupling substance ($k$), since these quantities are amenable to experimental manipulation.

<a id='7eef0a12-efa2-4e28-bd88-844bf9ebfc23'></a>

The model results show convincing correspondence to experimental data, in particular that presented in [2]. This concerns the metabolite concentrations, the phase shift between the cellular metabolites in synchronized states, and the existence of a critical range for the input flux and the external degradation rates where oscillations are observed. Furthermore, the model shows a phase response of the synchronized oscillations after addition of acetaldehyde and a synchronization of subpopulations after mixing. There are some quantitative discrepancies between the theoretical results and the experimental data. In particular, the phase response towards changes in the external acetaldehyde concentration is less pronounced in the model, and the simulated synchronization process takes a much longer time. This might indicate that the model is to some extent incomplete. Our assumption that acetaldehyde plays the role of the synchronizing substance is on the basis of that suggested previously [13,14]. These quantitative discrepancies lead us to conclude that coupling via transmembrane exchange of only acetaldehyde may not be sufficient, or that additional internal regulatory couplings have to be taken into account in order to strengthen the signal transduction to the PFK oscillator of a given cell from all surrounding cells.

<a id='c4afbd11-0255-412e-8611-5184b5f4a6e1'></a>

Obviously, the model may be extended in different ways to cope with the details of yeast cell metabolism. This concerns, for example, the consideration of more realistic rate equations for the individual processes, which would necessitate the consider- ation of a more complete reaction scheme without any lumping (for a detailed model see [29]). One might expect, however, that these modifications will not change the overall picture of the dynamics.

<a id='b46d1f62-307b-4ebe-b158-4ef974667336'></a>

Using numerical standard procedures, we were able to perform a complete bifurcation analysis for both the single-cell model and for two coupled cells. For the former, the number of system variables is 7, whereas for the latter it is 13. In principle, the program AUTO may be used to treat differential equation systems with a much greater number of variables. Preliminary investigations for three coupled cells lead to much more complex bifurcation diagrams (compared with the case of two cells shown in Figures 3–5). In addition to bifurcations leading to synchronous and regular asynchronous oscillations, further types of non-regular asynchronous oscillations also occur.

<a id='1c7ec6a0-6eed-48e6-924d-4dd31f2c979c'></a>

One might speculate how the complex bifurcations of two or three cells extrapolate to a macroscopic population. Can regular asynchronous oscillations or more complex limit cycles occur in a population with a large number of cells, or do these phenomena disappear because of averaging? These are questions that should be answered by further research.

<a id='f2de45f1-271c-4395-8311-da37c4d73396'></a>

The existence of desynchronized oscillations for interacting cells demonstrates that the dynamic behaviour of whole populations, investigated, for example, by the mean values or the time dependence of the extracellular metabolites, may not give a direct indication of the dynamics of the single cell. Non-synchronous oscillations of the individual cells would be characterized by mean concentration values of the population that seem to be constant from a 'macroscopic' point of view. The same holds true for the external concentration of the coupling metabolite. This may give rise to the misleading assumption that the system is in a steady state. Moreover, if such a system is perturbed, for example by addition of metabolites to the external solution, all cells are partly synchronized for a certain period of time. The mean concentration values show damped oscillations, where the damping results from a return to the original phase shifts between the oscillating cells. It would be inappropriate to model such a behaviour as a transition in a stationary state. These phenomena, which have been studied previously for a population of coupled cells containing two-component metabolic oscillators (occurrence of 'hidden oscillations' [15]), are found also in the present model; in particular, for the case of regular asynchronous oscillations. It could well be that oscillatory behaviour on the cellular level is a much more common phenomenon than generally assumed, since on the population level asynchronous oscillations are difficult to distinguish from a stationary behaviour.

<a id='a5eb5b9e-7283-45b1-949e-4c47393b2b44'></a>

We thank Jutta Passarge, Bas Teusink and Hans V. Westerhoff (Vrije University,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands) for interesting discussions and for introducing us to
the details of the experimental data on yeast cell oscillations. We are also grateful
to Oscar Somsen (Vrije University Amsterdam) and Thomas Höfer (Humboldt
Universität Berlin) for a critical reading of the manuscript.

<a id='ddd6b151-da52-463d-a35b-d8e1bf186120'></a>

# REFERENCES

1. Goldbeter, A. (1996) Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular Rhythms: the Molecular Basis of Periodic and Chaotic Behaviour, Cambridge University Press
2. Richard, P., Teusink, B., Hemker, M. B., van Dam, K. and Westerhoff, H. V. (1996) Yeast **12**, 731–740
3. Higgins, J. (1964) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **51**, 989–994
4. Sel'kov, E. E. (1968) Eur. J. Biochem. **4**, 79–86
5. Goldbeter, A. and Lefever, R. (1972) Biophys. J. **12**, 1302–1315
6. Richter, O., Betz, A. and Giersch, C. (1975) Biosystems **7**, 137–146
7. Termonia, Y. and Ross, J. (1981) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **78**, 2952–2956
8. Smolen, P. (1995) J. Theor. Biol. **174**, 137–148
9. Tornheim, K. (1979) J. Theor. Biol. **79**, 491–541
10. Aon, M. A., Cortassa, S., Westerhoff, H. V. and van Dam, K. (1992) J. Gen. Microbiol. **138**, 2219–2227
11. Pye, E. K. (1969) Can. J. Bot. **47**, 271–285
12. Ghosh, A. K., Chance, B. and Pye, E. K. (1971) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. **145**, 319–331

<a id='3409ad83-1964-4eb5-84bf-ba003244f670'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='984bde34-dd68-4395-906c-719507bee70e'></a>

Intercellular coupling of glycolytic oscillations

<a id='099b9f03-1512-4685-aa7c-9be3a5e5a5f2'></a>

333

<a id='31dde41c-8261-4420-868c-b3e2cd847a44'></a>

13 Richard, P., Bakker, B. M., Teusink, B., van Dam, K. and Westerhoff, H. V. (1996)
Eur. J. Biochem. **235**, 238–241
14 Betz, A. and Becker, J. U. (1975) J. Interdiscip. Cycle Res. **6**, 167–173
15 Wolf, J. and Heinrich, R. (1997) BioSystems **43**, 1–24
16 Doedel, E. J. (1981) Congr. Num. **30**, 265–284
17 Heinrich, R., Rapoport, S. M. and Rapoport, T. A. (1977) Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol.
**32**, 1–82
18 Aldridge, J. and Pye, E. K. (1976) Nature (London) **259**, 670–671
19 Richard, P., Diderich, J. A., Bakker, B. M., Teusink, B., van Dam, K. and Westerhoff,
H. V. (1994) FEBS Lett. **341**, 223–226
20 Heinrich, R. and Rapoport, T. A. (1975) BioSystems **7**, 130–136
21 Llorens, M., Nuño, J. C., Rodríguez, Y., Meléndez-Hevia, E. and Montero, F. (1999)
Biophys. J. **77**, 23–36

<a id='34a9ddf4-8fac-486e-bf49-c2a7a1186286'></a>

## APPENDIX A

### Metabolic concentrations in the symmetric steady state

In the symmetric steady state the sets of stationary metabolite concentrations are the same in all cells and, moreover, identical with the case of a single cell. Therefore, one may omit the cell index \u03b1 for the characterization of the cell in eqns. (1)-(4). Despite the non-linearity of the algebraic steady-state equations, an explicit solution may be found which reads:

<a id='d39e6b64-27f3-46b8-acb4-996271f3f617'></a>

S₁ = J₀ / (k₁ A₃ f(A₃)) (A1)

S₂ = [k₅ A₃(k₆ - k₂) + 2J₀(k₂ + k₆)] / (2k₂ k₆ N) (A2)

S₃ = (k₅ A₃ + 2J₀) / (2k₃ A₂) (A3)

S₄ = k₅ A₃[k₅ A₃(k₆ - k₂) + 2J₀(k₂ + k₆)] / (k₂ k₄ N(2J₀ - k₅ A₃)) (A4)

<a id='4f238c53-76cc-4ba1-8454-1a33b1eb1b02'></a>

22 Heinrich, R. and Schuster, S. (1996) The Regulation of Cellular Systems, Chapman
and Hall, New York
23 Baconnier, P. F., Pachot, P. and Demongeot, J. (1993) J. Biol. Syst. **1**, 335–347
24 Teusink, B., Bakker, B. M. and Westerhoff, H. V. (1996) Biochim. Biophys. Acta
**1275**, 204–212
25 Ghosh, A. K. and Chance, B. (1964) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **16**, 174–181
26 Hess, B. and Boiteux, A. (1968) Hoppe-Seyler's Z. Physiol. Chem. **349**, 1567–1574
27 Satroutdinov, A. D., Kuriyama, H. and Kobayashi, H. (1992) FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
**98**, 261–268
28 Keulers, M., Satroutdinov, A. D., Suzuki, T. and Kuriyama, H. (1996) Yeast **12**,
673–682
29 Rizzi, M., Baltes, M., Theobald, U. and Reuss, M. (1997) Biotechnol. Bioeng. **55**,
592–608

<a id='739e911f-12de-4ed9-8126-d68f1d3ad925'></a>

$\bar{N}_1 = \frac{k_6 N(k_5 \bar{A}_3 + 2J_0)}{k_5 \bar{A}_3(k_6 - k_2) + 2J_0(k_2 + k_6)}$ (A5)

$\bar{S}_4^{ex} = \frac{k_5^2 \bar{A}_3^2 [2\kappa(k_6 - k_2) - k_2 k_4 N] + 4k_5 J_0 \bar{A}_3 [\kappa(k_2 + k_6) + k_2 k_4 N] - 4k_2 k_4 J_0^2 N}{2k_2 k_4 \kappa N(2J_0 - k_5 \bar{A}_3)}$ (A6)

<a id='faadeed3-4f7c-4f91-9d0b-384c71ad7a40'></a>

In these equations the steady-state concentration of ATP is determined by

$k = \frac{k_2 k_4 \kappa \phi N(2J_0 - k_5 \bar{A}_3)^2}{4k_5 J_0 \bar{A}_3[\kappa(k_2+k_6)+k_2 k_4 N]-k_5^2 \bar{A}_3^2}$

$[2\kappa(k_2-k_6)+k_2 k_4 N]-4k_2 k_4 J_0^2 N$ (A7)

<a id='74b8ae4b-c380-46ce-ac66-34a70d28f1e5'></a>

which may be rewritten as a quadratic equation for $\overline{A}_3$. It is easy
to show that only one of the two solutions leads to non-negative
values of the stationary metabolite concentrations.

<a id='b5522103-e0b4-4b47-bb9a-fc1623a474a0'></a>

**APPENDIX B**
**Factorization of the characteristic polynomial for _n_ coupled cells**

<a id='8cc86dfc-335e-48d6-b240-d95f6d8d9e01'></a>

Let us consider n identical cells, each containing a reaction
system with m variable metabolites S₁,..., Sₘ. The cells are
coupled by the diffusion of one of these substances, e.g. Sₘ. The
system dynamics is described by:

<a id='71c41477-0cb4-43fe-88a9-9a222e56584f'></a>

with α = 1,...,n; i, j = 1,...,m

<a id='ea086b75-4a53-4261-8886-322fc4c4773b'></a>

$$\frac{dS_i^x}{dt} = f_i(S_i^x) - \delta_{im} \kappa (S_m^x - S_m^{ex}) \quad (B1)$$

<a id='1d978a5e-efbb-4559-ab2a-be37b74df852'></a>

$$\frac{dS_m^{ex}}{dt} = \frac{\kappa \phi}{n} \left( \sum_{\alpha=1}^{n} S_m^\alpha - n S_m^{ex} \right) - g(S_m^{ex}) \quad \text{(B2)}$$

<a id='402e9834-9f31-4336-adcf-59c790061b19'></a>

where the functions f_i describe the rates of the reactions producing and degrading the internal substances, S_i g(S_m^ex) denotes the degradation rate of the coupling substance S_m^ex in the external medium and \delta_im is the Kronecker symbol (\delta_im=1 for i=m and \delta_im=0 for i\ne m); see eqns. (1)-(4) for the case of yeast glycolysis. The total number of variables in eqn. system (B1) and (B2) amounts to (m \cdot n+1).

<a id='262a6562-3a7d-4ae4-a8cc-377773840161'></a>

In the following, we use the concentrations $S_i^1$ of the first cell,
the external concentration $S_m^{ex}$ of the coupling substance and the
concentration differences:

<a id='6e23221d-fd88-4cbb-9f78-7a9e8a634bb6'></a>

$\Delta S_i^\alpha = S_i^\alpha - S_i^1$ with $\alpha = 2, ..., n$ (B3)

<a id='9e5c83b7-8ca5-41d8-93a1-ee7834cee4fe'></a>

as a new complete set of variables. The symmetric steady state is characterized by equal concentrations of corresponding metabolites in different cells; that is, by $\overline{S_l^i}$, $\overline{S_m^{ex}}$ and $\Delta \overline{S_i^z} = 0$.
For the stability analysis of this steady state, we consider a linearization of the differential equation system (B1) and (B2) in the neighbourhood of this stationary state with respect to the deviations $\sigma_l^i = S_l^i - \overline{S_l^i}$, $\Delta_i^z = \Delta S_i^z - \Delta \overline{S_i^z}$ and $\sigma_m^{ex} = S_m^{ex} - \overline{S_m^{ex}}$. In this way, one obtains for the variables of the first cell:

<a id='6e796404-51ef-4d27-8971-47ba7a677496'></a>

dσ¹ᵢ / dt = Σᵐⱼ₌₁ (∂fᵢ / ∂S¹ⱼ) σ¹ⱼ - δᵢₘ κ(σ¹ₘ - σᵉˣₘ)

(B4)

<a id='24493029-7e86-4e9c-921f-c6c6dba35c5f'></a>

and for the concentration differences characterizing the variables
of the other cells \alpha > 1:

<a id='3d55addc-74e0-4211-b5ee-8c374b1c95ac'></a>

$$\frac{d\Delta_i^\alpha}{dt} = \sum_{j=1}^m \frac{\partial f_i}{\partial S_j^1} \Delta_j^\alpha - \delta_{im} \kappa \Delta_m^\alpha \quad \text{(B5)}$$

<a id='7403c145-a503-4266-bde3-db594e63f6ca'></a>

In the latter equation system, the identity of the cells is taken into account ; that is, the derivatives ∂fᵢ/∂Sⱼᵅ = ∂fⱼ/∂Sᵢᵅ at the symmetric steady state are, for all values of i and j, independent of the cell index α. Linearization of eqn. (B2) for the concentration of the external metabolite yields:

<a id='6f7ddc0e-78c7-4e1a-ab83-3ab099275458'></a>

$$\frac{d\sigma_m^{ex}}{dt} = \frac{\kappa\varphi}{n} \left( n\sigma_m^1 + \sum_{\alpha=2}^n \Delta_m^\alpha - n\sigma_m^{ex} \right) - \frac{\partial g}{\partial S_m^{ex}} \sigma_m^{ex}\quad\text{(B6)}$$

<a id='e28cfdc3-566b-44f7-ba42-7c0322503cbb'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society

<!-- PAGE BREAK -->

<a id='7f5dfcea-677f-4158-917c-62a2a3cc117b'></a>

334

<a id='d791fdb3-0bcf-4e49-a781-f9cd07363e1c'></a>

J. Wolf and R. Heinrich

<a id='7cf149b0-1596-4a4f-b3b6-7ab655653b43'></a>

Introducing the mean values of the metabolite concentrations:

<a id='20b57a09-f4ab-4144-862b-6e6a2fdb9977'></a>

$$\tilde{S}_i = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{n_\alpha=1}^{n} S_i^\alpha, i = 1,...,m \quad (B7)$$

<a id='840e3d02-6410-4413-bbd5-26e776683130'></a>

and the corresponding deviations from their steady-state values
$\tilde{S}_i$

<a id='231af163-ce01-4afc-8901-6ca998901350'></a>

$$\tilde{\sigma}_i = \tilde{S}_i - \hat{S}_i = \frac{1}{n} \left( n\sigma_i^1 + \sum_{\alpha=2}^{n} \Delta_i^\alpha \right) \quad (B8)$$

<a id='bb29ce4b-94b3-4d2a-9b5a-05dac2b31ba9'></a>

one derives by taking into account eqns. (B4) and (B5):

<a id='6ec19f1f-0b1e-4dd4-9100-0d68472581bc'></a>

$$\frac{d\tilde{\sigma}_i}{dt} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{j=1}^{m} \frac{\partial f_i}{\partial S_j^1} \left( n\sigma_j^1 + \sum_{\alpha=2}^{n} \Delta_j^\alpha \right) - \frac{\delta_{im} \kappa}{n} \left( n\sigma_m^1 + \sum_{\alpha=2}^{n} \Delta_m^\alpha - n\sigma_m^{ex} \right) \quad \text{(B9)}$$

<a id='5905cd27-8d37-4dcd-9177-c1bc381151a7'></a>

With eqn. (B8), this equation may be rewritten as:

<a id='ed35e502-2c1a-413c-8ebc-6c16bd9729e8'></a>

$$\frac{d\tilde{\sigma}_i}{dt} = \sum_{j=1}^{m} \frac{\partial f_i}{\partial S_j^1} \tilde{\sigma}_j - \delta_{im} \kappa(\tilde{\sigma}_m - \sigma_m^{ex}) \quad \text{(B10)}$$

<a id='cff9e3b5-f36d-4304-8eb7-a728056b0906'></a>

Received 2 August 1999/5 October 1999; accepted 1 November 1999

<a id='6c7894a0-6c49-4bb3-aa89-2d8c9fb6555e'></a>

Similarly, one obtains from eqns. (B6) and (B8):

<a id='2dbed34e-4c74-45b0-a377-57857dac9338'></a>

dσ_m^ex / dt = κφ(σ̃_m - σ_m^ex) - (∂g / ∂S_m^ex) σ_m^ex (B11)

<a id='b7982760-fa50-4b89-8b5e-2a242faab64e'></a>

The linear equation system (B10) and (B11) for the deviations
$\tilde{\sigma}_i$ of the mean intracellular concentrations, and for the deviation
$\sigma_m^{ex}$ of the extracellular concentration of the coupling substance,
is identical with the linearized system of a single cell, containing
the same metabolic system. In particular, it is decoupled from the
linear equation system (B5) for the differences $\Delta_i^\alpha$. Similarly,
equation system (B5) for the concentration differences is in-
dependent of the mean values. In addition to that, each subsystem
of (B5) characterized by a given value of $\alpha$ is decoupled from all
other subsystems. These properties imply a factorization of the
characteristic polynomial for the eigenvalues in the following
way:

$F(\lambda) \cdot D(\lambda)^{n-1} = 0,$

<a id='ff718d8a-63ef-4bcf-b558-cf620337ceec'></a>

where _F_(_λ_) is the characteristic polynomial of degree (_m_+1) of the single cell and _D_(_λ_) the characteristic polynomial of degree _m_ for any subsystem of the linear equation system (B5).

<a id='b4abf414-2597-4621-b0db-8908bdb79a05'></a>

© 2000 Biochemical Society